# Getting Started (1)

## Welcome to NEdit-ng\!

NEdit-ng is a GUI text editor for programs and plain-text files.
NEdit-ng is a Qt port of the Nirvana Editor (NEdit) version 5.6. It is
intended to be a drop in replacement for nedit in every practical way,
just as on many systems `/usr/bin/vi` is now a symlink to
`/usr/bin/vim`.

Because it is a true port of the original code, it (at least for now)
inherits some (but not all) of the limitations of the original. One such
limitation is that the text display can only handle 8-bit characters so
multi-byte UTF-8 characters appear as multiple glyphs. On the other
hand, some aspects have been improved simply by the fact that it is now
a Qt application.

These help texts are similarly copies of the nedit originals, converted
to be viewable in a browser with some text changes, but there are still
some sections that haven't been fully updated. The Help menu will also
be undergoing some changes to better integrate it with the help texts,
in the meantime please pardon our dust\!

-----

Help sections of interest to new users are listed under the "Basic
Operation" heading in the top-level Help menu:

  - [Selecting Text](02)
  - [Finding and Replacing Text](03)
  - [Cut and Paste](04)
  - [Using the Mouse](05)
  - [Keyboard Shortcuts](06)
  - [Shifting and Filling](07)

Programmers should also read the introductory section under the
"Features for Programming" section:

  - [Programming with NEdit-ng](10)

If you get into trouble, the Undo command in the Edit menu can reverse
any modifications that you make. NEdit-ng does not change the file you
are editing until you tell it to Save.

## Editing an Existing File

To open an existing file, choose Open... from the File menu. Select the
file that you want to open in the pop-up dialog that appears and click
on OK. You may open any number of files at the same time. Depending on
your settings (see "[Tabbed Editing](08)") each file can appear in its
own editor window, or it can appear under a tab in the same editor
window. Using Open... rather than re-typing the NEdit-ng command and
running additional copies of NEdit-ng, will give you quick access to all
of the files you have open via the Windows menu, and ensure that you
don't accidentally open the same file twice. NEdit-ng has no "main"
window. It remains running as long as at least one editor window is
open.

## Creating a New File

If you already have an empty (Untitled) window displayed, just begin
typing in the window. To create a new Untitled window, choose New Window
or New Tab from the File menu. To give the file a name and save its
contents to the disk, choose Save or Save As... from the File menu.

## Backup Files

NEdit-ng maintains periodic backups of the file you are editing so that
you can recover the file in the event of a problem such as a system
crash or network failure. These files are saved under the name
`~filename` (on Unix), where `filename` is the name of the file you were
editing. If an NEdit-ng process is killed, some of these backup files
may remain in your directory. (To remove one of these files on Unix, you
may have to prefix the `~` (tilde) character with a `\` (backslash) or
with `./` (dot slash) to prevent the shell from interpreting it as a
special character.)

## Shortcuts

As you become more familiar with NEdit-ng, substitute the control and
function keys shown on the right side of the menus for pulling down
menus with the mouse.

Dialogs are also streamlined so you can enter information quickly and
without using the mouse\*. To move the keyboard focus around a dialog,
use the tab and arrow keys. One of the buttons in a dialog is usually
drawn with a highlighted, outline. This button can be activated by
pressing Return or Enter. The dialog's Cancel or Close button can be
activated by pressing Escape. For example, to replace the string "thing"
with "things" type:

    Ctrl+R thing Tab things Return

\* Users who have set their keyboard focus mode to "pointer" should set
"Popups Under Pointer" in the Default Settings menu to avoid the
additional step of moving the mouse into the dialog.

