
NEdit-ng has two general types of selections, primary (highlighted
text), and secondary (underlined text). Selections can cover either a
simple range of text between two points in the file, or they can cover a
rectangular area of the file.

To select text for copying, deleting, or replacing, press the left mouse
button with the pointer at one end of the text you want to select, and
drag it to the other end. The text will become highlighted. To select a
whole word, double click (click twice quickly in succession). Double
clicking and then dragging the mouse will select a number of words.
Similarly, you can select a whole line or a number of lines by triple
clicking or triple clicking and dragging. Quadruple clicking selects the
whole file. After releasing the mouse button, you can still adjust a
selection by holding down <kbd>Shift</kbd> and dragging on either end of
the selection. To delete the selected text, press <kbd>Delete</kbd> or <kbd>Backspace</kbd>.
To replace it, begin typing.

To select a rectangle or column of text, hold <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> while
dragging the mouse. Rectangular selections can be used in any context
that normal selections can be used, including cutting and pasting,
filling, shifting, dragging, and searching. Operations on rectangular
selections automatically fill in tabs and spaces to maintain alignment
of text within and to the right of the selection. Note that the
interpretation of rectangular selections by Fill Paragraph is slightly
different from that of other commands, [Shifting and Filling](07.md) 
has details.

The middle mouse button can be used to make an additional selection
(called the secondary selection). As soon as the button is released, the
contents of this selection will be copied to the insert position of the
window where the mouse was last clicked (the destination window). This
position is marked by a caret shaped cursor when the mouse is outside of
the destination window. If there is a (primary) selection, adjacent to
the cursor in the window, the new text will replace the selected text.
Holding <kbd>Shift</kbd> while making the secondary selection will move the
text, deleting it at the site of the secondary selection, rather than
copying it.

Selected text can also be dragged to a new location in the file using
the middle mouse button. Holding <kbd>Shift</kbd> while dragging the text
will copy the selected text, leaving the original text in place. Holding 
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> will drag the text in overlay mode.

Normally, dragging moves text by removing it from the selected position
at the start of the drag, and inserting it at a new position relative to
the mouse. Dragging a block of text over existing characters displaces
the characters to the end of the selection. In overlay mode, characters
which are occluded by blocks of text being dragged are simply removed.
When dragging non-rectangular selections, overlay mode also converts the
selection to rectangular form, allowing it to be dragged outside of the
bounds of the existing text.

[Using the Mouse](05.md) summarizes the mouse commands
for making primary and secondary selections. Primary selections can also
be made via keyboard commands, see [Keyboard Shortcuts](06.md).
