
The Search menu contains a number of commands for finding and replacing
text.

The `Find...` and `Replace...` commands present dialogs for entering text
for searching and replacing. These dialogs also allow you to choose
whether you want the search to be case sensitive, or whether to use
pattern matching syntax (regular expressions). Searches begin at the
current text insertion position.

`Find Again` and `Replace Again` repeat the last find or replace command
without prompting for search strings. To selectively replace text, use
the two commands in combination: `Find Again`, then `Replace Again` if the
highlighted string should be replaced, or `Find Again` again to go to the
next string.

`Find Selection` searches for the text contained in the current primary
selection (see [Selecting Text](02.md)). The selected text does not have to
be in the current editor window, it may even be in another program. For
example, if the word dog appears somewhere in a window on your screen,
and you want to find it in the file you are editing, select the word dog
by dragging the mouse across it, switch to your NEdit-ng window and
choose `Find Selection` from the `Search` menu.

`Find Incremental`, which opens the interactive search bar, is yet another
variation on searching, where every character typed triggers a new
search. After you've completed the search string, the next occurrence in
the buffer is found by hitting the <kbd>Return</kbd> key, or by clicking on the
icon to the left (...). Holding a <kbd>Shift<kbd> key down finds the
previous occurrences. A middle click on the clear button copies the
content of any existing selection into the search text widget and
triggers a new search.

## Searching Backwards

Holding down the <kbd>Shift</kbd> key while choosing any of the search or replace
commands from the menu (or using the keyboard shortcut), will search in
the reverse direction. Users who have set the search direction using the
buttons in the search dialog, may find it a bit confusing that `Find Again` 
and `Replace Again` don't continue in the same direction as the
original search (for experienced users, consistency of the direction
implied by the <kbd>Shift</kbd> key is more important).

## Selective Replacement

To replace only some occurrences of a string within a file, choose
`Replace...` from the `Search` menu, enter the string to search for and the
string to substitute, and finish by pressing the `Find` button. When the
first occurrence is highlighted, use either `Replace Again` (<kbd>Ctrl + T</kbd>) to
replace it, or `Find Again` (<kbd>Ctrl + G</kbd>) to move to the next occurrence
without replacing it, and continue in such a manner through all
occurrences of interest.

To replace all occurrences of a string within some range of text, select
the range (see [Selecting Text](02.md)), choose `Replace...` from the `Search`
menu, type the string to search for and the string to substitute, and
press the `Selection` button in the dialog. Note that selecting text
inside the `Replace...` dialog will unselect the text in the window.

## Replacement in Multiple Documents

You can do the same replacement in more than one document at the same
time. To do that, enter the search and replacement string in the
replacement dialog as usual, then press the `Multiple Documents` button.
NEdit-ng will open another dialog where you can pick which open
documents the replacement should take place in. Then press `Replace` in
this dialog to do the replacement. All attributes (Regular Expression,
Case Sensitive, etc.) are used as selected in the main dialog.
