
The easiest way to copy and move text around in your file or between
windows is to use the clipboard, a hidden area that temporarily
stores text and data. **Edit &rarr; Cut** removes the selected text (see
[Selecting Text](02.md)) from your file and places it in the
clipboard. Once text is in the clipboard, **Edit &rarr; Paste** will copy it
to the insert position in the current window. For example, to move some
text from one place to another, select it by dragging the mouse over it,
choose **Edit &rarr; Cut** to remove it, click the pointer to move the insert point
where you want the text inserted, then choose **Edit &rarr; Paste** to insert it. **Edit &rarr; Copy**
copies text to the clipboard without deleting it from your file. You can
also use the clipboard to transfer text to and from other programs
that support use of the clipboard.

There are many other methods for copying and moving text within NEdit-ng windows and between NEdit-ng and other programs. 
The most common such method is clicking the middle mouse button to copy the primary selection (to the clicked position). 
Copying the selection by clicking the middle mouse button in many cases is the only way to transfer data to and from some older X programs. 
Holding the <kbd>Shift</kbd> key while clicking the middle mouse button moves the text, deleting it from its original position, rather than copying it. 
Other methods for transferring text include secondary selections, primary selection dragging, keyboard-based selection copying, and drag and drop. 
These are described in detail in the sections: "[Selecting Text](02.md)", "[Using the Mouse](05.md)", and "[Keyboard Shortcuts](06.md)".
