
Mouse-based editing is what NEdit-ng is all about, and learning to use the
more advanced features like secondary selections and primary selection
dragging will be well worth your while.

If you don't have time to learn everything, you can get by adequately
with just the left mouse button: Clicking the left button moves the
cursor. Dragging with the left button makes a selection. Holding the
<kbd>Shift</kbd> key while clicking extends the existing selection, or begins a
selection between the cursor and the mouse. Double or triple clicking
selects a whole word or a whole line.

This section will make more sense if you also read the section called,
"[Selecting Text](02.md)", which explains the terminology of
selections, that is, what is meant by primary, secondary, rectangular,
etc.

## Button and Modifier Key Summary

### General meaning of mouse buttons and modifier keys:

#### Buttons

  - Button 1 (left)  
    Cursor position and primary selection
  - Button 2 (middle)  
    Secondary selections, and dragging and copying the primary selection
  - Button 3 (right)  
    Quick-access programmable menu and pan scrolling

#### Modifier keys

  - <kbd>Shift</kbd>  
    On primary selections, (left mouse button): Extends selection to the
    mouse pointer
    On secondary and copy operations, (middle): Toggles between move and
    copy
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>  
    Makes selection rectangular or insertion columnar
  - <kbd>Alt</kbd> (on release)<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup>  
    Exchange primary and secondary selections

## Left Mouse Button

The left mouse button is used to position the cursor and to make primary
selections.

  - Click  
    Moves the cursor
  - Double Click  
    Selects a whole word
  - Triple Click  
    Selects a whole line
  - Quad Click  
    Selects the whole file
  - Shift Click  
    Adjusts (extends or shrinks) the selection, or if there is no
    existing selection, begins a new selection between the cursor and
    the mouse.
  - Ctrl + Shift Click  
    Adjusts (extends or shrinks) the Click selection rectangularly.
  - Drag  
    Selects text between where the mouse was pressed and where it was
    released.
  - Ctrl Drag  
    Selects rectangle between where the mouse was pressed and where it
    was released.

## Right Mouse Button

The right mouse button shows a programmable menu for frequently used
commands.

  - Click/Drag  
    Pops up the background menu (programmed from Preferences &rarr;
    Default Settings &rarr; Customize Menus &rarr; Window Background).
  - Ctrl + Drag  
    Pan scrolling. Scrolls the window both vertically and horizontally,
    as if you had grabbed it with your mouse.

## Middle Mouse Button

The middle mouse button is for making secondary selections, and copying
and dragging the primary selection.

  - Click  
    Copies the primary selection to the clicked position.

  - Shift + Click  
    Moves the primary selection to the clicked position, deleting it
    from its original position.

  - Drag  
    
    1.  Outside of the primary selection: Begins a secondary selection.
    2.  Inside of the primary selection: Moves the selection by
        dragging.

  - Ctrl + Drag  
    
    1.  Outside of the primary selection: Begins a rectangular secondary
        selection.
    2.  Inside of the primary selection: Drags the selection in overlay
        mode (see below).

When the mouse button is released after creating a secondary selection:

  - No Modifiers  
    If there is a primary selection, replaces it with the secondary
    selection. Otherwise, inserts the secondary selection at the cursor
    position.
  - Shift  
    Move the secondary selection, deleting it from its original
    position. If there is a primary selection, the move will replace the
    primary selection with the secondary selection. Otherwise, moves the
    secondary selection to the cursor position.
  - Alt \*  
    Exchange the primary and secondary selections.

While moving the primary selection by dragging with the middle mouse
button:

  - Shift  
    Leaves a copy of the original selection in place rather than
    removing it or blanking the area.
  - Ctrl  
    Changes from insert mode to overlay mode (see below).
  - Escape  
    Cancels drag in progress.

Overlay Mode: Normally, dragging moves text by removing it from the
selected position at the start of the drag, and inserting it at a new
position relative to the mouse. When you drag a block of text over
existing characters, the existing characters are displaced to the end of
the selection. In overlay mode, characters which are occluded by blocks
of text being dragged are simply removed. When dragging non-rectangular
selections, overlay mode also converts the selection to rectangular
form, allowing it to be dragged outside of the bounds of the existing
text.

Mouse buttons 4 and 5 are usually represented by a mouse wheel nowadays.
They are used to scroll up or down in the text window.

<a name="note-1"></a>
<small><sup>1</sup>The Alt key may be labeled Meta or Compose-Character on some
keyboards. Some window managers may bind combinations of the Alt key and
mouse buttons to window manager operations. In NEdit-ng, Alt is only
used on button release, so regardless of the window manager bindings for
Alt-modified mouse buttons, you can still do the corresponding NEdit-ng
operation by using the Alt key AFTER the initial mouse press, so that
Alt is held while you release the mouse button. If you find this
difficult or annoying, you can re-configure most window managers to skip
this binding, or re-configure NEdit-ng to use a different key
combination.</small>
