
Most of the keyboard shortcuts in NEdit-ng are shown on the right hand
sides of menus. However, there are more which are not as obvious. 
These include; dialog button shortcuts; menu and dialog mnemonics; 
labeled keyboard keys, such as the arrows, <kbd>Page Up</kbd>, <kbd>Page Down</kbd>, and <kbd>Home</kbd>; 
and optional <kbd>Shift</kbd> modifiers on accelerator keys, 
like `[Shift] Ctrl + F`.

## Menu Accelerators

Pressing the key combinations shown on the right of the menu items is a
shortcut for selecting the menu item with the mouse. Some items have the
"Shift" enclosed in brackets, such as `[Shift] Ctrl + F`. This
indicates that <kbd>Shift</kbd> is optional. In Search commands including 
<kbd>Shift</kbd> reverses the direction of the search. In shift commands,
it makes the command shift the selected text by a whole tab stop rather
than by single characters.

## Menu Mnemonics

Pressing <kbd>Alt</kbd> in combination with one of the underlined
characters in the menu bar pulls down that menu. Once the menu is pulled
down, typing the underlined characters in a menu item (without <kbd>Alt</kbd>) 
activates that item. With a menu pulled down, you can also use the
arrow keys to select menu items, and <kbd>Space</kbd> or <kbd>Enter</kbd> 
to activate them.

## Keyboard Shortcuts within Dialogs

The default button in a dialog is usually marked with a highlighted outline.
Pressing <kbd>Return</kbd> or <kbd>Enter</kbd> activates this button.

All dialogs have either a Cancel or Close button. This button can be
activated by pressing <kbd>Escape</kbd> (or <kbd>Esc</kbd>).

Pressing <kbd>Tab</kbd> moves the keyboard focus to the next item in a
dialog. Within an associated group of buttons, the arrow keys move the
focus among the buttons. <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Tab</kbd> moves backward through the items.

Many items in dialogs have an underline under one character in their
name. Pressing <kbd>Alt</kbd> along with this character, activates a button
as if you had pressed it with the mouse, or moves the keyboard focus to
the associated text field or list.

You can select items from a list by using the arrow keys to move the
selection and space to select.

In file selection dialogs, you can type the beginning characters of the
file name or directory in the list to select files.

## Labeled Function Keys

The labeled function keys on standard workstation and PC keyboards, like
the arrows, and <kbd>Page Up</kbd> and <kbd>Page Down</kbd>, are active 
in NEdit-ng, though not shown in the menus.

Holding down <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> while pressing a named key extends the scope
of the action that it performs. For example, <kbd>Home</kbd> normally moves the
insert cursor the beginning of a line. <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Home</kbd> moves it to the
beginning of the file. <kbd>Backspace</kbd> deletes one character, <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Backspace</kbd>
deletes one word.

Holding down <kbd>Shift</kbd> while pressing a named key begins or extends
a selection. Combining <kbd>Shift</kbd> and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> combines their
actions. For example, to select a word without using the mouse, position
the cursor at the beginning of the word and press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>&#8594;</kbd>.  
Holding down <kbd>Alt</kbd> modifies selection commands to make the selection rectangular.

Your operating system may perform several levels of translation between
keyboard keys and the actions they perform in a program. 
[Customizing NEdit-ng](28.md), and [Config Entries](30.md) 
have more information on this subject. Because of all of this
configurability, and since keyboards and standards for the meaning of
some keys vary from machine to machine, the mappings may be changed from
the defaults listed below.

## Modifier Keys (in general)

  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>  
    Extends the scope of the action that the key would otherwise
    perform. For example, Home normally moves the insert cursor to the
    beginning of a line. <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Home</kbd> moves it to the beginning of the
    file. <kbd>Backspace</kbd> deletes one character, <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Backspace</kbd> deletes one
    word.
  - <kbd>Shift</kbd>  
    Extends the selection to the cursor position. If there's no
    selection, begins one between the old and new cursor positions.
  - <kbd>Alt</kbd>  
    When modifying a selection, makes the selection rectangular.

(For the effects of modifier keys on mouse button presses, see [Using the Mouse](05.md))

## All Keyboards

  - <kbd>Escape</kbd>  
    Cancels operation in progress: menu selection, drag, selection, etc.
    Also equivalent to Cancel or Close button in dialogs.
  - <kbd>Backspace</kbd>  
    Delete the character before the cursor
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Backspace</kbd>  
    Delete the word before the cursor
  - <kbd>&#8592;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the left one character
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>&#8592;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor backward one word (Word delimiters are settable, see
    [Customizing NEdit-ng](28.md), and [Config Entries](30.md))
  - <kbd>&#8594;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the right one character
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>&#8594;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor forward one word
  - <kbd>&#8593;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor up one line
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>&#8593;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor up one paragraph. (Paragraphs are delimited by blank
    lines)
  - <kbd>&#8595;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor down one line.
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>&#8595;</kbd>  
    Move the cursor down one paragraph.
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Return</kbd>  
    Return with automatic indent, regardless of the setting of Auto
    Indent.
  - <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Return</kbd>  
    Return without automatic indent, regardless of the setting of Auto
    Indent.
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Tab</kbd>  
    Insert an ASCII tab character, without processing emulated tabs.
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Alt</kbd> + <kbd>&lt;C&gt;</kbd>  
    Insert the control-code equivalent of a key <kbd>&lt;C&gt;</kbd>
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>/</kbd>  
    Select everything (same as **Search &rarr; Select All** or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>A</kbd>)
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>\\</kbd>  
    Unselect
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>U</kbd>  
    Delete to start of line

## PC Standard Keyboard

  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Insert</kbd>  
    Copy the primary selection to the clipboard (same as **Edit &rarr; Copy** or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>)
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Insert</kbd>  
    Copy the primary selection to the cursor location.
  - <kbd>Delete</kbd>  
    Delete the character before the cursor. (Can be configured to delete
    the character after the cursor, see [Customizing NEdit-ng](28.md),
    and [Config Entries](30.md))
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Delete</kbd>  
    Delete to end of line.
  - <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Delete</kbd>  
    Cut, remove the currently selected text and place it in the
    clipboard. (same as **Edit &rarr; Cut** or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>X</kbd>)
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Delete</kbd>  
    Cut the primary selection to the cursor location.
  - <kbd>Home</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the beginning of the line
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Home</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the beginning of the file
  - <kbd>End</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the end of the line
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>End</kbd>  
    Move the cursor to the end of the file
  - <kbd>Page Up</kbd>  
    Scroll and move the cursor up by one page.
  - <kbd>Page Down</kbd>  
    Scroll and move the cursor down by one page.
  - <kbd>Alt</kbd>  
    Make the menu bar active for keyboard input (Arrow Keys, Return,
    Escape, and the Space Bar)
  - <kbd>Alt</kbd> + <kbd>Home</kbd>  
    Switch to the previously active document.
  - <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Page Up</kbd>  
    Switch to the previous document.
  - <kbd>Page Down</kbd>  
    Switch to the next document.

## Specialty Keyboards

On machines with different styles of keyboards, generally, text editing
actions are properly matched to the labeled keys, such as Remove,
Next-screen, etc.. If you prefer different key bindings, see the section
titled [Key Binding](31.md).
