
## Shift Left, Shift Right

While shifting blocks of text is most important for programmers (See
"Features for Programming"), it is also useful for other tasks, such as
creating indented paragraphs.

To shift a block of text one character to the right, select the text,
then choose Shift Right from the Edit menu. Note that the accelerator
keys for these menu items are Ctrl + 9 and Ctrl + 0, which correspond to
the right and left parenthesis on most US keyboards. Remember them as
adjusting the text in the direction pointed to by the parenthesis
character.

Holding the Shift key while selecting either Shift Left or Shift Right
will shift the text by one tab stop. If Emulate tabs is enabled in the
Preferences &rarr; Tab Stops... dialog, the shift amount is controlled by the Enulated tab spacing setting in that dialog.

It is also possible to shift blocks of text by selecting the text
rectangularly, and dragging it left or right (and up or down as well).
Using a rectangular selection also causes tabs within the selection to
be recalculated and substituted, such that the non-whitespace characters
remain stationary with respect to the selection.

## Filling

Text filling using the Fill Paragraph command in the Edit menu is one of
the most important concepts in NEdit-ng. And it will be well worth your
while to understand how to use it properly.

In plain text files, unlike word-processor files, there is no way to
tell which lines are continuations of other lines, and which lines are
meant to be separate, because there is no distinction in meaning between
newline characters which separate lines in a paragraph, and ones which
separate paragraphs from other text. This makes it impossible for a text
editor like NEdit-ng to tell parts of the text which belong together as
a paragraph from carefully arranged individual lines.

In continuous wrap mode (Preferences &rarr; Wrap &rarr; Continuous),
lines automatically wrap and unwrap themselves to line up properly at
the right margin. In this mode, you simply omit the newlines within
paragraphs and let NEdit-ng make the line breaks as needed.
Unfortunately, continuous wrap mode is not appropriate in the majority
of situations, because files with extremely long lines are not common
under Unix and may not be compatible with all tools, and because you
can't achieve effects like indented sections, columns, or program
comments, and still take advantage of the automatic wrapping.

Without continuous wrapping, paragraph filling is not entirely
automatic. Auto Newline wrapping keeps paragraphs lined up as you type,
but once entered NEdit-ng can no longer distinguish newlines which join
wrapped text, and newlines which must be preserved. Therefore, editing
in the middle of a paragraph will often leave the right margin messy and
uneven.

Since NEdit-ng can't act automatically to keep your text lined up, you
need to tell it explicitly where to operate, and that is what Fill
Paragraph is for. It arranges lines to fill the space between two
margins, wrapping the lines neatly at word boundaries. Normally, the
left margin for filling is inferred from the text being filled. The
first line of each paragraph is considered special, and its left
indentation is maintained separately from the remaining lines (for
leading indents, bullet points, numbered paragraphs, etc.). Otherwise,
the left margin is determined by the furthest left non-whitespace
character. The right margin is either the Wrap Margin, set in the
preferences menu (by default, the right edge of the window), or can also
be chosen on the fly by using a rectangular selection (see below).

There are three ways to use Fill Paragraph. The simplest is, while you
are typing text, and there is no selection, simply select Fill Paragraph
(or type Ctrl + J), and NEdit-ng will arrange the text in the paragraph
adjacent to the cursor. A paragraph, in this case, means an area of text
delimited by blank lines.

The second way to use Fill Paragraph is with a selection. If you select
a range of text and then chose Fill Paragraph, all of the text in the
selection will be filled. Again, continuous text between blank lines is
interpreted as paragraphs and filled individually, respecting leading
indents and blank lines.

The third, and most versatile, way to use Fill Paragraph is with a
rectangular selection. Fill Paragraph treats rectangular selections
differently from other commands. Instead of simply filling the text
inside the rectangular selection, NEdit-ng interprets the right edge of
the selection as the requested wrap margin. Text to the left of the
selection is not disturbed (the usual interpretation of a rectangular
selection), but text to the right of the selection is included in the
operation and is pulled in to the selected region. This method enables
you to fill text to an arbitrary right margin, without going back and
forth to the wrap-margin dialog, as well as to exclude text to the left
of the selection such as comment bars or other text columns.
