# File Format (9)

While plain-text is probably the simplest and most interchangeable file
format in the computer world, there is still variation in what
plain-text means from system to system. Plain-text files can differ in
character encoding, line termination, and wrapping.

Character encoding differences are the most obvious and pose the most
challenge to portability. NEdit-ng cannot currently display Unicode
(UTF-8) text files correctly, nor any multi-byte character set. Some
modern programming languages such as JavaScript, Raku and Apple's Swift
can accept UTF-8 encoded source code; these should not be written or
edited using current versions of NEdit-ng.

The primary difference between an MS DOS format file and a Unix format
file is how the lines are terminated. Unix uses a single newline
character. MS DOS uses a carriage-return and a newline. NEdit-ng can
read and write both file formats, but internally, it uses the single
character Unix standard. NEdit-ng auto-detects MS DOS format files based
on the line termination at the start of the file. Files are judged to be
DOS format if all of the first five line terminators, within a maximum
range, are DOS-style. To change the format in which NEdit-ng writes a
file from DOS to Unix or visa versa, use the Save As... command and
check or un-check the MS DOS Format button.

Wrapping within text files can vary among individual users, as well as
from system to system. Both Windows and MacOS make frequent use of plain
text files with no implicit right margin. In these files, wrapping is
determined by the tool which displays them. Files of this style also
exist on Unix systems, despite the fact that they are not supported by
all Unix utilities. To display this kind of file properly in NEdit-ng,
you have to select the continuous wrap mode (Preferences &rarr; Wrap
&rarr; Continuous). Wrapping modes are discussed in the sections
"[Preferences](29)" and "[Shifting and Filling](07)".

The last and most minute of format differences is the terminating
newline. Some programs expect a final terminating newline on all files
they read and may fail in various ways on files which do not have it.
Some text editors such as Vi enforce the terminating newline on all
files that they write; Emacs does not enforce this rule. Users are
divided on which is best. NEdit-ng makes the final terminating newline
optional (Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Terminate with Line
Break on Save).
