
Though general in appearance, NEdit-ng has many features intended
specifically for programmers. Major programming-related topics are
listed in separate sections under the heading: "Features for
Programming": [Syntax Highlighting](13.md), [Tab Stops/Emulated Tab
Stops](11.md), [Finding Declarations (ctags)](14.md), [Calltips](15.md), and
[Auto/Smart Indent](12.md). Minor topics related to programming are
discussed below.

## Language Modes

When NEdit-ng initially reads a file, it attempts to determine whether
the file is in one of the computer languages that it knows about.
Knowing what language a file is written in allows NEdit-ng to assign
highlight patterns and smart indent macros, and to set language specific
preferences like word delimiters, tab emulation, and auto-indent.
Language mode can be recognized from both the file name and from the
first 200 characters of content. Language mode recognition and
language-specific preferences are configured in: Preferences &rarr;
Default Settings &rarr; Language Modes....

You can set the language mode manually for a window, by selecting it
from the menu: Preferences &rarr; Language Mode.

## Backlighting

NEdit-ng can be made to set the background color of particular classes
of characters to allow easy identification of those characters. This is
particularly useful if you need to be able to distinguish between tabs
and spaces in a file where the difference is important. The colors used
for backlighting are specified in the config.ini file under
`nedit.backlightCharTypes`. You can turn backlighting on and off through
the Preferences &rarr; Apply Backlighting menu entry.

If you prefer to have backlighting turned on for all new windows, use
the Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Apply Backlighting menu
entry. This setting can be saved along with other preferences using
Preferences &rarr; Save Defaults.

## Line Numbers

To find a particular line in a source file by line number, choose Goto
Line \#... from the Search menu. You can also directly select a line
number text in a compiler message in your terminal window and choose
Goto Selected from the Search menu.

To find out the line number of a particular line in your file, turn on
Statistics Line in the Preferences menu and position the insertion point
anywhere on the line. The statistics line continuously updates the line
number of the line containing the cursor.

To go to a specific column on a given line, choose Goto Line \#... from
the Search menu and enter a line number and a column number separated by
a comma. (e.g. Enter `100,12` for line 100 column 12.) If you want to go
to a column on the current line just leave out the line number. (e.g.
Enter `,45` to go the column 45 on the current line.)

## Matching Parentheses

To help you inspect nested parentheses, brackets, braces, quotes, and
other characters, NEdit-ng has both an automatic parenthesis matching
mode, and a Goto Matching command. Automatic parenthesis matching is
activated when you type, or move the insertion cursor after a
parenthesis, bracket, or brace. It momentarily highlights either the
opposite character ('Delimiter') or the entire expression ('Range') when
the opposite character is visible in the window. To find a matching
character anywhere in the file, select it or position the cursor after
it, and choose Goto Matching from the Search menu. If the character
matches itself, such as a quote or slash, select the first character of
the pair. NEdit-ng will match `{`, `(`, `[`, `<`, `"`, `'`, `` ` ``,
`/`, and `\`. Holding the Shift key while typing the accelerator key
(Shift + Ctrl + M, by default), will select all of the text between the
matching characters.

When syntax highlighting is enabled, the matching routines can
optionally make use of the syntax information for improved accuracy. In
that case, a brace inside a highlighted string will not match a brace
inside a comment, for instance.

## Opening Included Files

The Open Selected command in the File menu understands the C
preprocessor's `#include` syntax, so selecting an `#include` line and
invoking Open Selected will often find the file referred to, unless
doing so depends on the settings of compiler switches or other
information not available to NEdit-ng.

## Interface to Programming Tools

Integrated software development environments can be interfaced directly
with NEdit-ng via the client server interface. These tools allow you to
click directly on compiler and runtime error messages and request
NEdit-ng to open files, and select lines of interest. The easiest method
is usually to use the tool's interface for character-based editors like
vi, to invoke nc-ng, but programmatic interfaces can also be derived
using the source code for nc-ng.
