# Tab Stops/Emulated Tab Stops (11)

## Changing the Tab Stop Distance

Tab stops are important for programming in languages which use
indentation to show nesting, as short-hand for producing white-space for
leading indents. As a programmer, you have to decide how to use
indentation, and how or whether tab characters map to your indentation
scheme.

Ideally, tab characters map directly to the amount of indent that you
use to distinguish nesting levels in your code. Unfortunately, the Unix
standard for interpretation of tab characters is eight characters
(probably dating back to mechanical capabilities of the original
teletype), which is usually too coarse for a single indent.

Most text editors, NEdit-ng included, allow you to change the
interpretation of the tab character, and many programmers take advantage
of this, and set their tab stops to 3 or 4 characters to match their
programming style. In NEdit-ng you set the hardware tab distance in
Preferences &rarr; Tab Stops... for the current window, or Preferences
&rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Tab Stops... (general), or Preferences
&rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Language Modes... (language-specific) to
change the defaults for future windows. The first two menu items bring up the [Tabs Dialog](41.md) window.

Changing the meaning of the tab character makes programming much easier
while you're in the editor, but can cause you headaches outside of the
editor, because there is no way to pass along the tab setting as part of
a plain-text file. All of the other tools which display, print, and
otherwise process your source code have to be made aware of how the tab
stops are set, and must be able to handle the change. Non-standard tab
stops can also confuse other programmers, or make editing your code
difficult for them if their text editors don't support changes in tab
stop distance.

## Emulated Tab Stops

An alternative to changing the interpretation of the tab character is
tab stop emulation. In the [Tabs Dialog](41.md), turning on Emulated
Tabs causes the Tab key to insert the correct number of spaces and/or
tabs to bring the cursor the next emulated tab stop, as if tabs were set
at the emulated tab distance rather than the hardware tab distance.
Backspacing immediately after entering an emulated tab will delete the
fictitious tab as a unit, but as soon as you move the cursor away from
the spot, NEdit-ng will forget that the collection of spaces and tabs is
a tab, and will treat it as separate characters. To enter a real tab
character with "Emulate Tabs" turned on, use Ctrl + Tab.

It is also possible to tell NEdit-ng not to insert ANY tab characters at
all in the course of processing emulated tabs, and in shifting and
rectangular insertion/deletion operations, for programmers who worry
about the misinterpretation of tab characters on other systems.
