
Programmers who use structured languages usually require some form of
automatic indent, so that they don't have to continually re-type the
sequences of tabs and/or spaces needed to maintain lengthy running
indents. NEdit-ng therefore offers "smart" indent, in addition to the
traditional automatic indent which simply lines up the cursor position
with the previous line.

## Smart Indent

A set of default smart indent macros are available for C and C++, and
while these can easily be configured for different default indentation
distances, they may not conform to everyone's exact C programming style.
Smart indent is programmed in terms of macros in the NEdit-ng macro
language which can be entered in: **Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Indent &rarr; Program Smart Indent**. 
Hooks are provided for intervening at the point that a newline is entered, 
either via the user pressing the <kbd>Enter</kbd> key, or through auto-wrapping; and for arbitrary
type-in to act on specific characters typed.

To type a newline character without invoking smart-indent when operating
in smart-indent mode, hold <kbd>Shift</kbd> while pressing the <kbd>Return</kbd> or
<kbd>Enter</kbd> key.

## Auto-Indent

With Indent set to Auto (the default), NEdit-ng keeps a running indent.
When you press <kbd>Return</kbd> or <kbd>Enter</kbd>, spaces and tabs are inserted to
line up the insert point under the start of the previous line.

Regardless of indent-mode, <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Return</kbd> always does the automatic
indent; <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Return</kbd> always does a return without indent.

## Block Indentation Adjustment

The **Shift Left** and **Shift Right** commands as well as rectangular dragging
can be used to adjust the indentation for several lines at once. To
shift a block of text one character to the right, select the text, then
choose **Edit &rarr; Shift Right**. Note that the accelerator keys
for these menu items are <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>9</kbd> and <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>0</kbd>, which correspond to the
right and left parenthesis on most keyboards. Remember them as adjusting
the text in the direction pointed to by the parenthesis character.
Holding <kbd>Shift</kbd> while selecting either **Edit &rarr; Shift Left** or **Edit &rarr; Shift Right**
will shift the text by one tab stop (or by one emulated tab stop if tab
emulation is turned on). [Shifting and Filling](07.md) has details.
