# Syntax Highlighting (13)

Syntax Highlighting means using colors and fonts to help distinguish
language elements in programming languages and other types of structured
files. Programmers use syntax highlighting to understand code faster and
better, and to spot many kinds of syntax errors more quickly.

To use syntax highlighting in NEdit-ng, select Highlight Syntax in the
Preferences menu. If NEdit-ng recognizes the computer language that you
are using, and highlighting rules (patterns) are available for that
language, it will highlight your text, and maintain the highlighting,
automatically, as you type.

If NEdit-ng doesn't correctly recognize the type of the file you are
editing, you can manually select a language mode from Language Modes in
the Preferences menu. You can also program the method that NEdit-ng uses
to recognize language modes in Preferences &rarr; Default Settings
&rarr; Language Modes....

If no highlighting patterns are available for the language that you want
to use, you can create new patterns relatively quickly. The Help section
"[Highlighting Patterns](32)" under "Customizing", has details.

If you are satisfied with what NEdit-ng is highlighting, but would like
it to use different colors or fonts, you can change these by selecting
Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Syntax Highlighting &rarr;
Text Drawing Styles. Highlighting patterns are connected with font and
color information through a common set of styles so that colorings
defined for one language will be similar across others, and patterns
within the same language which are meant to appear identical can be
changed in the same place. To understand which styles are used to
highlight the language you are interested in, you may need to look at
"[Highlighting Patterns](32)" section, as well.

Syntax highlighting is CPU intensive, and under some circumstances can
affect NEdit-ng's responsiveness. If you have a particularly slow system,
or work with very large files, you may not want to use it all of the
time. Syntax highlighting introduces two kinds of delays. The first is
an initial parsing delay, proportional to the size of the file. This
delay is also incurred when pasting large sections of text, filtering
text through shell commands, and other circumstances involving changes
to large amounts of text. The second kind of delay happens when text
which has not previously been visible is scrolled in to view. Depending
on your system, and the highlight patterns you are using, this may or
may not be noticeable. A typing delay is also possible, but unlikely if
you are only using the built-in patterns.
