# Finding Declarations (ctags) (14)

NEdit-ng can process tags files generated using the Unix ctags command
or the Exuberant Ctags program. Ctags creates index files correlating
names of functions and declarations with their locations in C, Fortran,
or Pascal source code files. (See the ctags manual page for more
information). Ctags produces a file called "tags" which can be loaded by
NEdit-ng. NEdit-ng can manage any number of tags files simultaneously.
Tag collisions are handled with a popup menu to let the user decide
which tag to use. In 'Smart' mode NEdit-ng will automatically choose the
desired tag based on the scope of the file or module. Once loaded, the
information in the tags file enables NEdit-ng to go directly to the
declaration of a highlighted function or data structure name with a
single command. To load a tags file, select "Load Tags File" from the
File menu and choose a tags file to load, or specify the name of the
tags file on the NEdit-ng command line:

    nedit-ng -tags tags

NEdit-ng can also be set to load a tags file automatically when it
starts up. Setting the config.ini item `nedit.tagFile` to the name of a
tag file tells NEdit-ng to look for that file at startup time (see
"[Customizing NEdit-ng](28)"). The file name can be either a complete
path name, in which case NEdit-ng will always load the same tags file,
or a file name without a path or with a relative path, in which case
NEdit-ng will load it starting from the current directory. The second
option allows you to have different tags files for different projects,
each automatically loaded depending on the directory you're in when you
start NEdit-ng. Setting the name to "tags" is an obvious choice since
this is the name that ctags uses. NEdit-ng normally evaluates relative
path tag file specifications every time a file is opened. All accessible
tag files are loaded at this time. To disable the automatic loading of
tag files specified as relative paths, set the config.ini item
`nedit.alwaysCheckRelativeTagsSpecs` to False.

To unload a tags file, select "Un-load Tags File" from the File menu and
choose from the list of tags files. NEdit-ng will keep track of tags
file updates by checking the timestamp on the files, and automatically
update the tags cache.

To find the definition of a function or data structure once a tags file
is loaded, select the name anywhere it appears in your program (see
"[Selecting Text](02)") and choose "Find Definition" from the
Search menu.
