# Basic Regular Expression Syntax (16)

Regular expressions (regex's) are useful as a way to match inexact
sequences of characters. They can be used in the 'Find...' and
'Replace...' search dialogs and are at the core of Color Syntax
Highlighting patterns. To specify a regular expression in a search
dialog, simply click on the 'Regular Expression' radio button in the
dialog.

A regex is a specification of a pattern to be matched in the searched
text. This pattern consists of a sequence of tokens, each being able to
match a single character or a sequence of characters in the text, or
assert that a specific position within the text has been reached (the
latter is called an anchor.) Tokens (also called atoms) can be modified
by adding one of a number of special quantifier tokens immediately after
the token. A quantifier token specifies how many times the previous
token must be matched (see below.)

Tokens can be grouped together using one of a number of grouping
constructs, the most common being plain parentheses. Tokens that are
grouped in this way are also collectively considered to be a regex atom,
since this new larger atom may also be modified by a quantifier.

A regex can also be organized into a list of alternatives by separating
each alternative with pipe characters, `|`. This is called alternation.
A match will be attempted for each alternative listed, in the order
specified, until a match results or the list of alternatives is
exhausted (see [Alternation](#Alternation) section below.)

## The 'Any' Character

If a dot `.` appears in a regex, it means to match any character
exactly once. By default, dot will not match a newline character, but
this behavior can be changed (see help topic [Parenthetical
Constructs](18.md), under the heading, Matching Newlines).

## Character Classes

A character class, or range, matches exactly one character of text, but
the candidates for matching are limited to those specified by the class.
Classes come in two flavors as described below:

  - `[...]`  
    Regular class, match only characters listed.
  - `[^...]`  
    Negated class, match only characters *not* listed.

As with the dot token, by default negated character classes do not match
newline, but can be made to do so.

The characters that are considered special within a class specification
are different than the rest of regex syntax as follows. If the first
character in a class is the `]` character (second character if the
first character is `^`) it is a literal character and part of the class
character set. This also applies if the first or last character is `-`.
Outside of these rules, two characters separated by `-` form a character
range which includes all the characters between the two characters as
well. For example, `[^f-j]` is the same as `[^fghij]` and means to
match any character that is not `f`, `g`, `h`, `i`, or `j`.

## Anchors

Anchors are assertions that you are at a very specific position within
the search text. NEdit-ng regular expressions support the following
anchor tokens:

  - `^`  
    Beginning of line
  - `$`  
    End of line
  - `<`  
    Left word boundary
  - `>`  
    Right word boundary
  - `\B`  
    Not a word boundary

Note that the `\B` token ensures that neither the left nor the right
character are delimiters, **or** that both left and right characters are
delimiters. The left word anchor checks whether the previous character
is a delimiter and the next character is not. The right word anchor
works in a similar way.

Note that word delimiters are user-settable, and defined by the
config.ini entry `nedit.wordDelimiters`, see "[Config Entries](30.md)".

## Quantifiers

Quantifiers specify how many times the previous regular expression atom
may be matched in the search text. Some quantifiers can produce a large
performance penalty, and can in some instances completely lock up NEdit.
To prevent this, avoid nested quantifiers, especially those of the
maximal matching type (see below.)

The following quantifiers are maximal matching, or "greedy", in that
they match as much text as possible (but don't exclude shorter matches
if that is necessary to achieve an overall match).

  - `*`  
    Match zero or more
  - `+`  
    Match one or more
  - `?`  
    Match zero or one

The following quantifiers are minimal matching, or "lazy", in that they
match as little text as possible (but don't exclude longer matches if
that is necessary to achieve an overall match).

  - `*?`  
    Match zero or more
  - `+?`  
    Match one or more
  - `??`  
    Match zero or one

One final quantifier is the counting quantifier, or brace quantifier. It
takes the following basic form:

  - `{min,max}`  
    Match from `min` to `max` times the previous regular expression
    atom.

If `min` is omitted, it is assumed to be zero. If `max` is omitted, it
is assumed to be infinity. Whether specified or assumed, `min` must be
less than or equal to `max`. Note that both `min` and `max` are limited
to 65535. If both are omitted, then the construct is the same as `*`.
Note that `{,}` and `{}` are both valid brace constructs. A single
number appearing without a comma, e.g. `{3}` is short for the
`{min,min}` construct, or to match exactly `min` number of times.

The quantifiers `{1}` and `{1,1}` are accepted by the syntax, but
are optimized away since they mean to match exactly once, which is
redundant information. Also, for efficiency, certain combinations of
`min` and `max` are converted to either `*`, `+`, or `?` as
follows:

  - `{} {,} {0,}`  
    `*`
  - `{1,}`  
    `+`
  - `{,1} {0,1}`  
    `?`

Note that `{0}` and `{0,0}` are meaningless and will generate an error
message at regular expression compile time.

Brace quantifiers can also be "lazy". For example `{2,5}?` would try to
match 2 times if possible, and will only match 3, 4, or 5 times if that
is what is necessary to achieve an overall match.

## Alternation

A series of alternative patterns to match can be specified by separating
them with vertical pipes, `|`. An example of alternation would be
`a|be|sea`. This will match `a`, or `be`, or `sea`. Each alternative can
be an arbitrarily complex regular expression. The alternatives are
attempted in the order specified. An empty alternative can be specified
if desired, e.g. `a|b|`. Since an empty alternative can match
nothingness (the empty string), this guarantees that the expression will
match.

## Comments

Comments are of the form `(?#<comment text>)` and can be inserted
anywhere and have no effect on the execution of the regular expression.
They can be handy for documenting very complex regular expressions. Note
that a comment begins with `(?#` and ends at the first occurrence of an
ending parenthesis, or the end of the regular expression... period.
Comments do not recognize any escape sequences.
