
The **Shell** menu allows you to execute shell commands from within
NEdit-ng. You can add items to the menu to extend NEdit-ng's command set
or to incorporate custom automatic editing features using shell commands
or editing languages like awk and sed. To add items to the menu, select
**Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Customize Menus &rarr; Shell Menu**. 
NEdit-ng comes pre-configured with a few useful Unix commands like
`spell` and `sort`, but we encourage you to add your own custom extensions.

**Shell &rarr; Filter Selection...** prompts you for a shell command to use to process
the currently selected text. The output from this command replaces the
contents of the selection.

**Shell &rarr; Execute Command...** prompts you for a shell command and replaces the
current selection with the output of that command. If there is no
selection, it deposits the output at the current insertion point. In the
Shell Command field, the `%` character expands to the name (including
directory path), and the `#` character expands to the current line
number of the file in the window. To include a `%` or `#` character in
the command, use `%%` or `##`, respectively.

**Shell &rarr; Execute Command Line** uses the position of the cursor in the window to
indicate a line to execute as a shell command line. The cursor may be
positioned anywhere on the line. This command allows you to use an
NEdit-ng window as an editable command window for saving output and
saving commands for re-execution. Note that the same character
expansions described above in Execute Command also occur with this
command.

The config.ini setting `nedit.shell` (See [Customizing NEdit-ng](28.md))
determines which shell is used to execute commands. The default value
for this setting is the user's login shell.
