
## Built in Variables

These variables are read-only and cannot be changed by direct
assignment.

  - `$1`, `$2`, `$3`, `$4`, `$5`, `$6`, `$7`, `$8`, `$9`
    `$args[<expr>]`  
    Argument information. The first 9 arguments (if there are that many)
    can be referenced as read-only values using the shorthand form. All
    arguments can be accessed as values in the `$args` array, using a
    numeric index starting at `1`. The total number of arguments received
    by a function is given by `$n_args` or `$args[]`.
  - `$active_pane`  
    Index of the current pane.
  - `$auto_indent`  
    Contains the current preference for auto indent. Can be `"off"`, `"on"`, or `"smart"`.
  - `$calltip_ID`  
    Equals the ID of the currently displayed calltip, or `0` if no calltip
    is being displayed.
  - `$cursor`  
    Position of the cursor in the current window.
  - `$column`  
    Column number of the cursor position in the current window.
  - `$display_width`  
    Width of the current pane in pixels.
  - `$em_tab_dist`  
    If tab stop emulation is turned on in the  **Preferences &rarr; Tab Stops...** dialog, 
	the value is the distance between emulated tab stops. 
	If tab emulation is turned off, the value is `0`.
  - `$empty_array`  
    An array with no elements. This can be used to initialize an array
    to an empty state.
  - `$file_format`  
    Current newline format that the file will be saved with. Can be
    `"unix"`, `"dos"` or `"macintosh"`.
  - `$file_name`  
    Name of the file being edited in the current window, stripped of
    directory component.
  - `$file_path`  
    Directory component of file being edited in the current window.
  - `$font_name`  
    Contains the current plain text font name.
  - `$highlight_syntax`  
    Whether syntax highlighting is turned on.
  - `$incremental_backup`  
    Contains `1` if incremental auto saving is on, otherwise `0`.
  - `$incremental_search_line`  
    Has a value of `1` if the preference is selected to always show the
    incremental search line, otherwise `0`.
  - `$language_mode`  
    Name of language mode set in the current window.
  - `$line`  
    Line number of the cursor position in the current window.
  - `$locked`  
    True if the file has been locked by the user.
  - `$make_backup_copy`  
    Has a value of `1` if original file is kept in a backup file on save,
    otherwise `0`.
  - `$max_font_width`  
    The maximum font width of all the active styles. Syntax highlighting
    styles are only considered if syntax highlighting is turned on.
  - `$min_font_width`  
    The minimum font width of all the active styles. Syntax highlighting
    styles are only considered if syntax highlighting is turned on.
  - `$modified`  
    True if the file in the current window has been modified and the
    modifications have not yet been saved.
  - `$VERSION`  
    Returns NEdit-ng's version number (`"2019004"` for NEdit-ng 2019.4).
  - `$n_display_lines`  
    The number of lines visible in the currently active pane.
  - `$n_panes`  
    The number of panes in the current window.
  - `$overtype_mode`  
    True if in Overtype mode.
  - `$read_only`  
    True if the file is read only.
  - `$selection_start, $selection_end`  
    Beginning and ending positions of the primary selection in the
    current window, or `-1` if there is no text selected in the current
    window.
  - `$selection_left, $selection_right`  
    Left and right character offsets of the rectangular (primary)
    selection in the current window, or `-1` if there is no selection or
    it is not rectangular.
  - `$server_name`  
    Name of the current NEdit-ng server.
  - `$show_line_numbers`  
    Whether line numbers are shown next to the text.
  - `$show_matching`  
    Contains the current preference for showing matching pairs, such as
    "\[\]" and "{}" pairs. Can be `"off"`, `"delimiter"`, or `"range"`.
  - `$match_syntax_based`  
    Whether pair matching should use syntax information, if available.
  - `$statistics_line`  
    Has a value of `1` if the statistics line is shown, otherwise `0`.
  - `$sub_sep`  
    Contains the value of the array sub-script separation string.
  - `$tab_dist`  
    The distance between tab stops for a hardware tab character, as set
    in the **Preferences &rarr; Tab Stops...** dialog.
  - `$text_length`  
    The length of the text in the current document.
  - `$top_line`  
    The line number of the top line of the currently active pane.
  - `$use_tabs`  
    Whether the user is allowing the NEdit-ng to insert tab characters
    to maintain spacing in tab emulation and rectangular dragging
    operations. (The setting of the **Use tab characters in padding and
    emulated tabs** button in the  **Preferences &rarr; Tab Stops...** dialog.)
  - `$wrap_margin`  
    The right margin in the current window for text wrapping and
    filling.
  - `$wrap_text`  
    The current wrap text mode. Values are "none", "auto" or
    "continuous".

## Built-in Subroutines

  - `append_file( string, filename )`  
    Appends a string to a named file. Returns `1` on successful write, or
    `0` if unsuccessful.

  - `beep()`  
    Ring the bell.

  - `calltip( "text_or_key" [, pos [, mode or position_modifier, ...]] )`  
    Pops up a calltip. `<pos>` is an optional position in the buffer
    where the tip will be displayed. Passing `-1` for `<pos>` is
    equivalent to not specifying a position, and it guarantees that the
    tip will appear on-screen somewhere even if the cursor is not. The
    upper-left corner of the calltip will appear below where the cursor
    would appear if it were at this position.

    `<mode>` is one of `"tipText"` (default), `"tipKey"`, or `"tagKey"`.
    `"tipText"` displays the text as-is, `"tagKey"` uses it as the key to
    look up a tag, then converts the tag to a calltip, and `"tipKey"` uses
    it as the key to look up a calltip, then falls back to `"tagKey"`
    behavior if that fails. You'll usually use `"tipKey"` or `"tipText"`.

    Finally, you can modify the placement of the calltip relative to the
    cursor position (or `<pos>`) with one or more of these optional
    position modifiers: `"center"` aligns the center of the calltip with
    the position. `"right"` aligns the right edge of the calltip with the
    position. (`"center"` and `"right"` may not both be used.) `"above"`
    places the calltip above the position. `"strict"` does not allow the
    calltip to move from its position in order to avoid going off-screen
    or obscuring the cursor.

    Returns the ID of the calltip if it was found and/or displayed
    correctly, `0` otherwise.

  - `clipboard_to_string()`  
    Returns the contents of the clipboard as a macro string. Returns
    empty string on error.

  - `dialog( message, btn_1_label, btn_2_label, ... )`  
    Pop up a dialog for querying and presenting information to the user.
    First argument is a string to show in the message area of the
    dialog. Additional optional arguments represent labels for buttons
    to appear along the bottom of the dialog. Returns the number of the
    button pressed (the first button is number `1`), or `0` if the user
    closed the dialog via the window close box.

  - `filename_dialog( [title[, mode[, defaultPath[, filter[, defaultName]]]]] )`  
    Presents a file selection dialog with the given title to the user
    that prompts for a new or existing file.

    Options are: `<title>` will be the title of the dialog, defaults to
    "Choose file". If `<mode>` is set to `"exist"` (default), the dialog
	will only allow the user to select files which already exist.
	If it is set to `"new"`, then, the user may specify any valid filename
	regardless of a file existing with that name or not. 
	`<defaultPath>` is the default path to
    use. Default (or `""`) will use the active document's directory.
    `<filter>` is the file glob which determines which files to display.
    Is set to `"*"` if filter is `""` and by default. `<defaultName>` is
    the default filename that is filled in automatically.

    Returns `""` if the user cancelled the dialog, otherwise returns the
    fully-qualified path, including the filename.

  - `focus_window( window_name )`  
    Sets the window on which subsequent macro commands operate.
    `<window_name>` can be either a fully qualified file name, or a
    relative filename (which will be completed from NEdit-ng's working
    directory) or one of `"last"` for the last window created, or `"next"`
    for the next window in the chain from the currently focused window
    (the first window being the one returned from calling
    `focus_window("last")`. Returns the name of the newly-focused
    window, or an empty string if the requested window was not found.

  - `get_character( position )`  
    Returns the single character at the position indicated by the first
    argument to the routine from the current window.

  - `get_range( start, end )`  
    Returns the text between a starting and ending position from the
    current window.

  - `get_selection()`  
    Returns a string containing the text currently selected by the
    primary selection either from the current window (no keyword), or
    from anywhere on the screen (keyword "any").

  - `getenv( name )`  
    Gets the value of an environment variable.

  - `kill_calltip( [calltip_ID] )`  
    Kills any calltip that is being displayed in the window in which the
    macro is running. If there is no displayed calltip this does
    nothing. If a calltip ID is supplied then the calltip is killed only
    if its ID is `<calltip_ID>`.

  - `length( string )`  
    Returns the length of a string

  - `list_dialog( message, text, btn_1_label, btn_2_label, ... )`  
    Pop up a dialog for prompting the user to choose a line from the
    given text string. The first argument is a message string to be used
    as a title for the fixed text describing the list. The second string
    provides the list data: this is a text string in which list entries
    are separated by newline characters. Additional optional arguments
    represent labels for buttons to appear along the bottom of the
    dialog. Returns the line of text selected by the user as the
    function value (without any newline separator) or the empty string
    if none was selected, and number of the button pressed (the first
    button is number `1`), in `$list_dialog_button`. If the user closes
    the dialog via the window close box, the function returns the empty
    string, and `$list_dialog_button` returns `0`.

  - `max( n1, n2, ... )`  
    Returns the maximum value of all of its arguments

  - `min( n1, n2, ... )`  
    Returns the minimum value of all of its arguments

  - `read_file( filename )`  
    Reads the contents of a text file into a string. On success, returns
    `1` in `$read_status`, and the contents of the file as a string in the
    subroutine return value. On failure, returns the empty string `""` and
    a `0` `$read_status`.

  - `replace_in_string( string, search_for, replace_with [, type, "copy"] )`  
    Replaces all occurrences of a search string in a string with a
    replacement string. Arguments are 1: string to search in, 2: string
    to search for, 3: replacement string. There are two optional
    arguments. One is a search type, either `"literal"`, `"case"`, `"word"`,
    `"caseWord"`, `"regex"`, or `"regexNoCase"`. The default search type is
    `"literal"`. If the optional `"copy"` argument is specified, a copy of
    the input string is returned when no replacements were performed. By
    default an empty string (`""`) will be returned in this case. Returns
    a new string with all of the replacements done.

  - `replace_range( start, end, string )`  
    Replaces all the text between two positions in the current window.
    If the cursor position is between start and end it will be set to
    start.

  - `replace_selection( string )`  
    Replaces the primary-selection selected text in the current window.

  - `replace_substring( string, start, end, replace_with )`  
    Replacing a substring between two positions in a string within
    another string.

  - `revert_to_saved()`  
    Reloads the file, discarding all changes done to the document by the
    user since the last save.

  - `search( search_for, start [, search_type, wrap, direction] )`  
    Searches silently in a window without dialogs, beeps, or changes to
    the selection. Arguments are: 1: string to search for, 2: starting
    position. Optional arguments may include the strings: `"wrap"` to make
    the search wrap around the beginning or end of the string,
    `"backward"` or `"forward"` to change the search direction (`"forward"` is
    the default), `"literal"`, `"case"`, `"word"`, `"caseWord"`, `"regex"`, or
    `"regexNoCase"` to change the search type (default is `"literal"`).
    Returns the starting position of the match, or `-1` if nothing
    matched. Also returns the ending position of the match in
    `$search_end`.

  - `search_string( string, search_for, start [, search_type, direction] )`  
    Built-in macro subroutine for searching a string. Arguments are 1:
    string to search in, 2: string to search for, 3: starting position.
    Optional arguments may include the strings: `"wrap"` to make the
    search wrap around the beginning or end of the string, `"backward"` or
    `"forward"` to change the search direction (`"forward"` is the default),
    `"literal"`, `"case"`, `"word"`, `"caseWord"`, `"regex"`, or `"regexNoCase"` to
    change the search type (default is `"literal"`). Returns the starting
    position of the match, or `-1` if nothing matched. Also returns the
    ending position of the match in `$search_end`.

  - `select( start, end )`  
    Selects (with the primary selection) text in the current buffer
    between a starting and ending position.

  - `select_rectangle( start, end, left, right )`  
    Selects a rectangular area of text between a starting and ending
    position, and confined horizontally to characters displayed between
    positions `"left"`, and `"right"`.

  - `set_cursor_pos( position )`  
    Set the cursor position for the current window.

  - `shell_command( command, input_string )`  
    Executes a shell command, feeding it input from `input_string`. On
    completion, output from the command is returned as the function
    value, and the command's exit status is returned in the global
    variable `$shell_cmd_status`.

  - `split(string, separation_string [, search_type])`  
    Splits a string using the separator specified. Optionally the
    `<search_type>` argument can specify how the `<separation_string>`
    is interpreted. The default is `"literal"`. The returned value is an
    array with keys beginning at `0`.

  - `string_dialog( message, btn_1_label, btn_2_label, ... )`  
    Pops up a dialog prompting the user to enter information. The first
    argument is a string to show in the message area of the dialog.
    Additional optional arguments represent labels for buttons to appear
    along the bottom of the dialog. Returns the string entered by the
    user as the function value, and number of the button pressed (the
    first button is number `1`), in `$string_dialog_button`. If the user
    closes the dialog via the window close box, the function returns the
    empty string, and `$string_dialog_button` returns `0`.

  - `string_compare(string1, string2 [, consider-case])`  
    Compare two strings and return `0` if they are equal, `-1` if string1 is
    lexicographically less than string2 or `1` if string1 is lexicographically 
	greater than string2. The values for the optional consider-case argument 
	is either `"case"` or `"nocase"`. The default is to do a case sensitive comparison.

  - `string_to_clipboard( string )`  
    Copy the contents of a macro string to the clipboard.

  - `substring( string, start [, end] )`  
    Returns the portion of a string between a start and end position
    (with the position of the beginning of the string being `0`). If end
    is missing, the position of the end of the string is used. If either
    of the positions are negative, they are treated as relative to the
    end of the string. A position specified either before the start of
    the string or after the end of the string is repositioned to the
    nearest valid string position. If the start position is beyond the
    end position, the empty string is returned.

  - `t_print( string1, string2, ... )`  
    Writes strings to the terminal (stdout) from which NEdit-ng was
    started.

  - `tolower( string )`  
    Return an all lower-case version of `string`.

  - `toupper( string )`  
    Return an all upper-case version of `string`.

  - `valid_number( string )`  
    Returns `1` if the `string` can be converted to a number without error
    following the same rules that the implicit conversion would.
    Otherwise `0`.

  - `write_file( string, filename )`  
    Writes a string (parameter 1) to a file named in parameter 2.
    Returns `1` on successful write, or `0` if unsuccessful.

## Deprecated Functions

Some functions are included only for supporting legacy macros. You
should not use any of these functions in any new macro you write.

  - `match()`  
    **DEPRECATED** Use `select_to_matching()` instead.
	
## Deprecated Built in Variables

Some global variables no longer have a practical meaning in NEdit-ng. You
should not use any of these variables in any new macro you write.

  - `$font_name_bold`  
    Contains the current bold text font name.  
	**DEPRECATED** NEdit has dropped support for simultanious different fonts, use `$font_name`

  - `$font_name_bold_italic`  
    Contains the current bold-italic text font name.  
	**DEPRECATED** NEdit has dropped support for simultanious different fonts, use `$font_name`
	
  - `$font_name_italic`  
    Contains the current italic text font name.  
	**DEPRECATED** NEdit has dropped support for simultanious different fonts, use `$font_name`
