
Rangesets are a tool of the macro language to tag parts, or ranges, of
the text, which shall be viewed as a group. A range is merely a
contiguous range of characters between a start and an end position in
the document, and a set of ranges belonging together is called a
rangeset. So, a rangeset is nothing but an in general non-contiguous
part of the text.

Rangesets can be assigned a background color to make them visible:
characters within all ranges of a rangeset will have the background
color of the rangeset. (If more than one rangeset includes a given
character, its background color will be that of the most recently
created rangeset which has a color defined.)

Applications of rangesets are for example:

  - Showing differences between two versions of a file. Then, one
    rangeset would be those parts of the current file that are not in
    the prior version.
  - Highlighting all occurrences of a particular pattern, e.g. showing
    all the strings 'foobar' in the file.
  - Highlighting spelling mistakes found by a spell-checker.

Rangesets are manipulated only through macro routines. Rangesets must be
created first using the `rangeset_create()` function, which will return
an identifier for the newly-created (empty) rangeset. This identifier is
then passed to the other rangeset functions to manipulate the rangeset.
For example, ranges are added to a rangeset with the `rangeset_add()`
function.

Notice that the ranges inside a rangeset do not have a particular
identity. Only, they are given a (dynamically changing) numeric index,
counting from 1, in the order of appearance in the text buffer. The
ranges are adjusted when modifications are made to the text buffer: they
shift around when characters are added or deleted staying with the
original strings of characters. However, ranges within a set will
coalesce if the characters between them are removed, or a new range is
added to the set which bridges or overlaps others. For more on this, see
[How rangesets change with modifications](#how-rangesets-change-with-modifications).

There is a limit to the number of rangesets which can exist at any time
&mdash; currently up to 63 in each document. Care should be taken to
destroy any rangesets which are no longer needed, by using the
`rangeset_destroy()` function, if this limit is reached.

Rangesets can be named: this is useful for macros which need a fixed
identification for rangesets which are used for the same purpose in
different documents. Although a new rangeset's number is arbitrary, its
name can be fixed. This is done using the `rangeset_set_name()`
function. Note that rangeset names within a particular document may not
be unique. For this reason, the `rangeset_get_by_name()` function
returns an array of identifiers, which will be empty if the name has not
been associated with a rangeset.

### How rangesets change with modifications

When changes are made to the document text, ranges within each set are
altered with it, according to their behavioral mode. If changes are made
outside of the ranges in a rangeset, each range simply maintains its
size and adjusts its position to match the changes. When text within a
range is deleted, the range's length is reduced by the same amount. When
changes involving new text are made within a range of the set, or to one
of the extremities of a range, different behaviours may be desirable.
The `rangeset_set_mode()` function allows these modes to be chosen.

Note that the precise behaviour of these modes may change in future
versions of NEdit-ng.

The available modes are:

`maintain` or `ins_del` &mdash; Both these modes have the same
behaviour.  New text added at the front of a range in a set is not added
to the range; new text added within the range or at the end extends the
range. Replacement overlapping an extremity of the set acts as if the
new text were added first, then the old text deleted. This causes
curtailment at the front of the range, extension at the end. Replacement
of the full text of the range removes the range from the set. The
default behaviour for a newly created rangeset is maintain. 

`del_ins` &mdash; New text added at the front or end of a range in a set
is not added to the range; new text added within the range extends the
range. Replacement overlapping an extremity of the set acts as if the
old text were deleted first, then the new text added. This causes
curtailment at either end. Replacement of the full text of the range
removes the range from the set. 

`include` &mdash; New text added at the front or end of a range in a set extends the range, as does new text added within the range. Replacement overlapping an extremity of the set acts as if the new text were added first, then the old text deleted. This causes curtailment at the front of the range, extension at the end. Replacement of the full text of the range adds the new text to the range if the start position of the replacement is at the range's start point. 

`exclude` &mdash; New text added at the front or end of a range in a set
does not extend the range; new text added within the range extends the
range. Replacement overlapping an extremity causes curtailment of the
range. Replacement of the full text of the range removes the range from
the set. 

`break` &mdash; New text added at the front or end of a range in a set
does not extend the range; new text added within the range will split
the range. Replacement overlapping an extremity causes curtailment of
the range. Replacement of the full text of the range removes the range
from the set. 

### Notes

A rangeset is manipulated *only* through macro routines. Rangesets can
easily become very large, and may exceed the capacity of the running
process. Coloring relies on proper color names or specifications (such
as the "\#rrggbb" hexadecimal digit strings), and appropriate hardware
support. If an invalid color name is given, the default background color
is used instead. Behaviours set using `rangeset_set_mode()` are subject
to change in future versions.

## Rangeset read-only variables

  - `$rangeset_list`   
    array of active rangeset identifiers, with integer keys starting at
    0, in the order the rangesets were defined.

## Rangeset functions

  - `rangeset_create()`  
    `rangeset_create( n )`  
    Creates one or more new rangesets. The first form creates a single
    range set and returns its identifier; if there are no rangesets
    available it returns 0. The second form creates n new rangesets, and
    returns an array of the rangeset identifiers with keys beginning at
    0. If the requested number of rangesets is not available it returns
    an empty array.

  - `rangeset_destroy( r )`  
    `rangeset_destroy( array )`  
    Deletes all information about a rangeset or a number of rangesets.
    The first form destroys the rangeset identified by r. The second
    form should be passed an array of rangeset identifiers with keys
    beginning at 0 (i.e. the same form of array returned by
    `rangeset_create(n)`; it destroys all the rangesets appearing in the
    array. If any of the rangesets do not exist, the function continues
    without errors. Does not return a value.

  - `rangeset_add( r )`  
    `rangeset_add( r, start, end )`  
    `rangeset_add( r, r0 )`  
    Adds to the rangeset r. The first form adds the range identified by
    the current primary selection to the rangeset, unless the selection
    is rectangular. The second form adds the range defined by the start
    and end positions given. The third form adds all ranges in the
    rangeset r0 to the rangeset r, and returns 0.
    
    Returns the index of the newly-added range within the rangeset.

  - `rangeset_subtract( r, [start, end] )`  
    `rangeset_subtract( r, r0 )`  
    Removes from the rangeset r. The first form removes the range
    identified by the current primary selection from the rangeset,
    unless start and end are defined, in which case the range they
    define is removed. The second form removes all ranges in the
    rangeset r0 from the rangeset r. Does not return a value.

  - `rangeset_invert( r )`  
    Changes the rangeset r so that it contains all ranges not in r. Does
    not return a value.

  - `rangeset_get_by_name( name )`  
    Returns an array of active rangeset identifiers, with integer keys
    starting at 0, whose name matches name.

  - `rangeset_info( r )`  
    Returns an array containing information about the rangeset r. The
    array has the following keys: `defined` (whether a rangeset with
    identifier r is defined), `count` (the number of ranges in the
    rangeset), `color` (the current background color of the rangeset,
    an empty string if the rangeset has no color), `name` (the user
    supplied name of the rangeset, an empty string if the rangeset has
    no name), and `mode` (the name of the modify-response mode of the
    rangeset).

  - `rangeset_range( r, [index] )`  
    Returns details of a specific range in the rangeset r. The range is
    specified by index, which should be between 1 and n (inclusive),
    where n is the number of ranges in the rangeset. The return value is
    an array containing the keys `start` (the start position of the
    range) and `end` (the end position of the range). If index is not
    supplied, the region returned is the span of the entire rangeset
    (the region starting at the start of the first range and ending at
    the end of the last). If index is outside the correct range of
    values, the function returns an empty array.

  - `rangeset_includes( r, pos )`  
    Returns the index of the range in rangeset r which includes pos;
    returns 0 if pos is not contained in any of the ranges of r. This
    can also be used as a simple true/false function which returns true
    if pos is contained in the rangeset.

  - `rangeset_set_color( r, color )`  
    Attempts to apply the color as a background color to the ranges of
    r. If color is at empty string, removes the coloring of r. No check
    is made regarding the validity of color: if the color is invalid (a
    bad name, or not supported by the hardware) this has unpredictable
    effects.

  - `rangeset_set_name( r, name )`  
    Apply the name to the rangeset r.

  - `rangeset_set_mode( r, type )`  
    Changes the behaviour of the rangeset r when modifications to the
    text buffer occur. type can be one of the following: `maintain` (the
    default), `break`, `include`, `exclude`, `ins_del` or `del_ins`.
    (These modes are described above.)
