
All of the editing capabilities of NEdit-ng are represented as a special
type of subroutine, called an action routine, which can be invoked from
both macros and translation table entries (see [Key Binding](31.md)).

## Actions Representing Menu Commands

### File Menu

  - `new()`
  - `open()`
  - `open_dialog()`
  - `open_selected()`
  - `close()`
  - `save()`
  - `save_as()`
  - `save_as_dialog()`
  - `revert_to_saved_dialog()`
  - `include_file()`
  - `include_file_dialog()`
  - `load_macro_file()`
  - `load_macro_file_dialog()`
  - `load_tags_file()`
  - `load_tags_file_dialog()`
  - `unload_tags_file()`
  - `load_tips_file()`
  - `load_tips_file_dialog()`
  - `unload_tips_file()`
  - `print()`
  - `print_selection()`
  - `exit()`

### Edit Menu

  - `undo()`
  - `redo()`
  - `delete()`
  - `select_all()`
  - `shift_left()`
  - `shift_left_by_tab()`
  - `shift_right()`
  - `shift_right_by_tab()`
  - `uppercase()`
  - `lowercase()`
  - `fill_paragraph()`
  - `control_code_dialog()`

### Search Menu

  - `find()`
  - `find_dialog()`
  - `find_again()`
  - `find_selection()`
  - `replace()`
  - `replace_dialog()`
  - `replace_all()`
  - `replace_in_selection()`
  - `replace_again()`
  - `goto_line_number()`
  - `goto_line_number_dialog()`
  - `goto_selected()`
  - `mark()`
  - `mark_dialog()`
  - `goto_mark()`
  - `goto_mark_dialog()`
  - `goto_matching()`
  - `select_to_matching()`
  - `find_definition()`
  - `show_tip()`

### Shell Menu

  - `filter_selection_dialog()`
  - `filter_selection()`
  - `execute_command()`
  - `execute_command_dialog()`
  - `execute_command_line()`
  - `shell_menu_command()`

### Macro Menu

  - `macro_menu_command()`
  - `repeat_macro()`
  - `repeat_dialog()`

### Windows Menu

  - `split_pane()`
  - `close_pane()`
  - `detach_document()`
  - `move_document_dialog()`

An action representing a menu command is usually named the same as its
corresponding menu item except that all punctuation is removed, all
letters are changed to lower case, and spaces are replaced with
underscores. To present a dialog to ask the user for input, use the
actions with the `_dialog` suffix. Actions without the `_dialog`
suffix take the information from the routine's arguments (see below).

## Menu Action Routine Arguments

Arguments are text strings enclosed in quotes. Below are the menu action
routines which take arguments. Optional arguments are enclosed in `[]`.

  - `new( ["tab" | "window" | "prefs" | "opposite"] )`
  - `close( ["prompt" | "save" | "nosave"] )`
  - `execute_command( shell-command )`
  - `filter_selection( shell-command )`
  - `find( search-string [, search-direction] [, search-type] [, search-wrap] )`
  - `find_again( [search-direction] [, search-wrap] )`
  - `find_definition( [tag-name] )`
  - `find_dialog( [search-direction] [, search-type] [, keep-dialog] )`
  - `find_selection( [search-direction] [, search-wrap] [, non-regex-search-type] )`
  - `goto_line_number( [line-number] [, column-number] )`
  - `goto_mark( mark-letter )`
  - `include_file( filename )`
  - `load_tags_file( filename )`
  - `macro_menu_command( macro-menu-item-name )`
  - `mark( mark-letter )`
  - `open( filename )`
  - `replace( search-string, replace-string, [, search-direction] [, search-type] [, search-wrap] )`
  - `replace_again( [search-direction] [, search-wrap] )`
  - `replace_all( search-string, replace-string [, search-type] )`
  - `replace_dialog( [search-direction] [, search-type] [, keep-dialog] )`
  - `replace_in_selection( search-string, replace-string [, search-type] )`
  - `save_as( filename )`
  - `shell_menu_command( shell-menu-item-name )`
  - `unload_tags_file( filename )`

### Some notes on argument types above

  - Arguments to `new()`  
    
      - `"tab"`  
        Open a new tab
      - `"window"`  
        Open a new window
      - `"prefs"`  
        Follow the user's tab/window preference
      - `"opposite"`  
        Opposite of user's tab/window preference
    
    Default behaviour is `"prefs"`.

  - `filename`  
    Path names are relative to the directory from which NEdit-ng was
    started. Shell interpreted wildcards and `~` are not expanded.

  - `keep-dialog`  
    Either `"keep"` or `"nokeep"`.

  - `mark-letter`  
    The mark command limits users to single letters. Inside of macros,
    single digits are allowed as marks. These won't interfere with marks
    set by the user.

  - `macro-menu-item-name`  
    Name of the command exactly as specified in the Macro Menu dialogs.

  - `non-regex-search-type`  
    Either `"literal"`, "case", `"word"`, or `"caseWord"`.

  - `search-direction`  
    Either `"forward"` or `"backward"`.

  - `search-type`  
    Either `"literal"`, `"case"`, `"word"`, `"caseWord"`, `"regex"`, or `"regexNoCase"`.

  - `search-wrap`  
    Either `"wrap"` or `"nowrap"`.

  - `shell-menu-item-name`  
    Name of the command exactly as specified in the Shell Menu dialogs.

## Window Preferences Actions (Deprecated)

  **NOTE:** The following functions for setting preferences are all deprecated.
  There is a plan to revamp the preference system to be more like most modern editors; 
  replacing the global and per-window settings with a single set of application wide 
  settings controlled by singular settings dialog.

  - `set_auto_indent( "off" | "on" | "smart" )`  
    Set auto indent mode for the current window.
  - `set_em_tab_dist( em-tab-distance )`  
    Set the emulated tab size. An em-tab-distance value of `0` or less
    translates to no emulated tabs. Em-tab-distance must be smaller than
    `1000`.
  - `set_fonts( font-name, italic-font-name, bold-font-name, bold-italic-font-name )`  
    Set all the fonts used for the current window.
  - `set_highlight_syntax( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set syntax highlighting mode for the current window. A value of 0
    turns it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are
    supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_incremental_backup( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set incremental backup mode for the current window. A value of 0
    turns it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are
    supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_incremental_search_line( [0 | 1] )`  
    Show or hide the incremental search line for the current window. A
    value of `0` turns it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If no
    parameters are supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_language_mode( language-mode )`  
    Set the language mode for the current window. If the language mode
    is `""` or unrecognized, it will be set to Plain.
  - `set_locked( [0 | 1] )`  
    This only affects the locked status of a file, not its read-only
    status. Permissions are *not* changed. A value of `0` turns it off and
    a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are supplied the option
    is toggled.
  - `set_make_backup_copy( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set whether backup copies are made during saves for the current
    window. A value of `0` turns it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If
    no parameters are supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_overtype_mode( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set overtype mode for the current window. A value of `0` turns it off
    and a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are supplied the
    option is toggled.
  - `set_show_line_numbers( [0 | 1] )`  
    Show or hide line numbers for the current window. A value of `0` turns
    it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are supplied
    the option is toggled.
  - `set_show_matching( "off" | "delimiter" | "range" )`  
    Set show matching (...) mode for the current window.
  - `set_match_syntax_based( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set whether matching should be syntax based for the current window.
  - `set_statistics_line( [0 | 1] )`  
    Show or hide the statistics line for the current window. A value of
    `0` turns it off and a value of `1` turns it on. If no parameters are
    supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_tab_dist( tab-distance )`  
    Set the size of hardware tab spacing. Tab-distance must be a value
    greater than `0` and no greater than 20.
  - `set_use_tabs( [0 | 1] )`  
    Set whether tab characters are used for the current window. A value
    of `0` turns it off (using space characters instead) and a value of 1
    turns it on. If no parameters are supplied the option is toggled.
  - `set_wrap_margin( wrap-width )`  
    Set the wrap width for text wrapping of the current window. A value
    of `0` means to wrap at window width.
  - `set_wrap_text( "none" | "auto" | "continuous" )`  
    Set wrap text mode for the current window.

## Keyboard-Only Actions

In addition to the arguments listed in the call descriptions below, any
routine involving cursor movement can take the argument `"extend"`,
meaning, adjust the primary selection to the new cursor position.
Routines which take the `"extend"` argument as well as mouse dragging
operations for both primary and secondary selections can take the
optional keyword `"rect"`, meaning, make the selection rectangular. Any
routine that accepts the `"scrollbar"` argument will move the display but
not the cursor or selection. Routines that accept the `"nobell"`
argument will fail silently without beeping, when that argument is
supplied.

  - `backward_character( ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor one character to the left.

  - `backward_paragraph(["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the paragraph, or if the cursor
    is already at the beginning of a paragraph, moves the cursor to the
    beginning of the previous paragraph. Paragraphs are defined as
    regions of text delimited by one or more blank lines.

  - `backward_word( ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of a word, or, if the cursor is
    already at the beginning of a word, moves the cursor to the
    beginning of the previous word. Word delimiters are user-settable,
    and defined by the X resource wordDelimiters.

  - `beginning_of_file( ["scrollbar"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the file.

  - `beginning_of_line( ["absolute"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the line. If `"absolute"` is
    given, always moves to the absolute beginning of line, regardless of
    the text wrapping mode.

  - `beginning_of_selection()`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the selection without
    disturbing the selection.

  - `copy_clipboard()`  
    Copies the current selection to the clipboard.

  - `copy_primary()`  
    Copies the primary selection to the cursor.

  - `copy_to()`  
    If a secondary selection exists, copies the secondary selection to
    the cursor. If no secondary selection exists, copies the primary
    selection to the pointer location.

  - `copy_to_or_end_drag()`  
    Completes either a secondary selection operation, or a primary drag.
    If the user is dragging the mouse to adjust a secondary selection,
    the selection is copied and either inserted at the cursor location,
    or, if pending-delete is on and a primary selection exists in the
    window, replaces the primary selection. If the user is dragging a
    block of text (primary selection), completes the drag operation and
    leaves the text at its current location.

  - `cut_clipboard()`  
    Deletes the text in the primary selection and places it in the
    clipboard.

  - `cut_primary()`  
    Copies the primary selection to the cursor and deletes it at its
    original location.

  - `delete_selection()`  
    Deletes the contents of the primary selection.

  - `delete_next_character( ["nobell"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the character following the cursor.

  - `delete_previous_character( ["nobell"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the character before the cursor.

  - `delete_next_word( ["nobell"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the word following the cursor.

  - `delete_previous_word( ["nobell"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the word before the cursor.

  - `delete_to_start_of_line( ["nobell", "wrap"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the characters between the cursor and the start of the line.
    If `"wrap"` is given, deletes to the previous wrap point or
    beginning of line, whichever is closest.

  - `delete_to_end_of_line( ["nobell", "absolute"] )`  
    If a primary selection exists, deletes its contents. Otherwise,
    deletes the characters between the cursor and the end of the line.
    If `"absolute"` is given, always deletes to the absolute end of
    line, regardless of the text wrapping mode.

  - `deselect_all()`  
    De-selects the primary selection.

  - `end_of_file( ["scrollbar"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the end of the file.

  - `end_of_line( ["absolute"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the end of the line. If `"absolute"` is given,
    always moves to the absolute end of line, regardless of the text
    wrapping mode.

  - `end_of_selection()`  
    Moves the cursor to the end of the selection without disturbing the
    selection.

  - `exchange( ["nobell"] )`  
    Exchange the primary and secondary selections.

  - `extend_adjust()`  
    Attached mouse-movement events to begin a selection between the
    cursor and the mouse, or extend the primary selection to the mouse
    position.

  - `extend_end()`  
    Completes a primary drag-selection operation.

  - `extend_start()`  
    Begins a selection between the cursor and the mouse. A
    drag-selection operation can be started with either `extend_start()`
    or `grab_focus()`.

  - `focus_pane( [relative-pane] | [positive-index] | [negative-index] )`  
    Move the focus to the requested pane. Arguments can be specified in
    the form of a relative-pane (`"first"`, `"last"`, `"next"`,
    `"previous"`), a positive-index (numbers greater than `0`, `1` is the
    same as `"first"`) or a negative-index (numbers less than `0`, `-1` is
    the same as `"last"`).

  - `forward_character()`  
    Moves the cursor one character to the right.

  - `forward_paragraph( ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the next paragraph. Paragraphs
    are defined as regions of text delimited by one or more blank lines.

  - `forward_word( ["tail"] ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor to the beginning of the next word. Word delimiters
    are user-settable, and defined by the config.ini setting
    `nedit.wordDelimiters`. If the `"tail"` argument is supplied the
    cursor will be moved to the end of the current word or the end of
    the next word, if the cursor is between words.

  - `grab_focus()`  
    Moves the cursor to the mouse pointer location, and prepares for a
    possible drag-selection operation (bound to `extend_adjust()`), or
    multi-click operation (a further `grab_focus()` action). If a second
    invocation of grab focus follows immediately, it selects a whole
    word, or a third, a whole line.

  - `insert_string( "string" )`  
    If pending delete is on and the cursor is inside the selection,
    replaces the selection with "string". Otherwise, inserts `"string"` at
    the cursor location.

  - `key_select( "direction" [,"nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor one character in "direction" (`"left"`, `"right"`,
    `"up"`, or `"down"`) and extends the selection. Same as
    forward/backward-character("extend"), or process-up/down("extend"),
    for compatibility with previous versions.

  - `last_document()`  
    Switches the active tab to the one that was previously active.

  - `move-destination()`  
    Moves the cursor to the pointer location without disturbing the
    selection. (This is an unusual way of working. We left it in for
    compatibility with previous versions, but if you actually use this
    capability, please send us some mail, otherwise it is likely to
    disappear in the future.

  - `move_to()`  
    If a secondary selection exists, deletes the contents of the
    secondary selection and inserts it at the cursor, or if
    pending-delete is on and there is a primary selection, replaces the
    primary selection. If no secondary selection exists, moves the
    primary selection to the pointer location, deleting it from its
    original position.

  - `move_to_or_end_drag()`  
    Completes either a secondary selection operation, or a primary drag.
    If the user is dragging the mouse to adjust a secondary selection,
    the selection is deleted and either inserted at the cursor location,
    or, if pending-delete is on and a primary selection exists in the
    window, replaces the primary selection. If the user is dragging a
    block of text (primary selection), completes the drag operation and
    deletes the text from its current location.

  - `newline()`  
    Inserts a newline character. If Auto Indent is on, lines up the
    indentation of the cursor with the current line.

  - `newline_and_indent()`  
    Inserts a newline character and lines up the indentation of the
    cursor with the current line, regardless of the setting of Auto
    Indent.

  - `newline_no_indent()`  
    Inserts a newline character, without automatic indentation,
    regardless of the setting of Auto Indent.

  - `next_document()`  
    Switches the active tab to the next one on the tab bar.

  - `next_page( ["stutter"] ["column"] ["scrollbar"] ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor and scroll forward one page. The parameter
    `"stutter"` moves the cursor to the bottom of the display, unless it
    is already there, otherwise it will page down. The parameter
    `"column"` will maintain the preferred column while moving the cursor.

  - `page_left( ["scrollbar"] ["nobell"] )`  
    Move the cursor and scroll left one page.

  - `page_right( ["scrollbar"] ["nobell"] )`  
    Move the cursor and scroll right one page.

  - `paste_clipboard()`  
    Insert the contents of the clipboard at the cursor, or if pending
    delete is on, replace the primary selection with the contents of the
    clipboard.

  - `previous_document()`  
    Switches the active tab to the previous one on the tab bar.

  - `previous_page( ["stutter"] ["column"] ["scrollbar"] ["nobell"] )`  
    Moves the cursor and scroll backward one page. The parameter
    `"stutter"` moves the cursor to the top of the display, unless it is
    already there, otherwise it will page up. The parameter "column"
    will maintain the preferred column while moving the cursor.

  - `process_bdrag()`  
    Same as `secondary_or_drag_start()` for compatibility with previous
    versions.

  - `process_cancel()`  
    Cancels the current `extend_adjust()`, `secondary_adjust()`, or
    `secondary_or_drag_adjust()` in progress.

  - `process_down( ["nobell", "absolute"] )`  
    Moves the cursor down one line. If `"absolute"` is given, always moves
    to the next line in the text buffer, regardless of wrapping.

  - `process_return()`  
    Same as newline for compatibility with previous versions.

  - `process_shift_down( ["nobell", "absolute"] )`  
    Same as `process_down("extend")` for compatibility with previous
    versions.

  - `process_shift_up( ["nobell", "absolute"] )`  
    Same as `process_up("extend")` for compatibility with previous
    versions.

  - `process_tab()`  
    If tab emulation is turned on, inserts an emulated tab, otherwise
    inserts a tab character.

  - `process_up( ["nobell", "absolute"] )`  
    Moves the cursor up one line. If `"absolute"` is given, always moves
    to the previous line in the text buffer, regardless of wrapping.

  - `raise_window([relative-window] | [positive-index] | [negative-index] [, "focus" | "nofocus"] )`  
    Raise the current focused window to the front if no argument is
    supplied. Arguments can be specified in the form of a
    relative-window (`"first"`, `"last"`, `"next"`, `"previous"`), a
    positive-index (numbers greater than `0`, `1` is the same as `"last"`)
    or a negative-index (numbers less than `0`, `-1` is the same as
    `"first"`).

    Moreover, it can be specified whether or not the raised window
    should request the input focus. By default, it depends on the
    value of the `nedit.focusOnRaise` setting (see [Config Entries](30.md)) 
    whether or not the input focus is requested.

  - `scroll_down( nUnits, ["lines" | "pages"] )`  
    Scroll the display down (towards the end of the file) by a given
    number of units, units being lines or pages. Default units are
    lines.

  - `scroll_left( nPixels )`  
    Scroll the display left by nPixels.

  - `scroll_right( nPixels )`  
    Scroll the display right by nPixels.

  - `scroll_up( nUnits, ["lines" | "pages"] )`  
    Scroll the display up (towards the beginning of the file) by a given
    number of units, units being lines or pages. Default units are
    lines.

  - `scroll_to_line( lineNum )`  
    Scroll to position line number lineNum at the top of the pane. The
    first line of a file is line 1.

  - `secondary_adjust()`  
    Attached mouse-movement events to extend the secondary selection to
    the mouse position.

  - `secondary_or_drag_adjust()`  
    Attached mouse-movement events to extend the secondary selection, or
    reposition the primary text being dragged. Takes two optional
    arguments, `"copy"`, and `"overlay"`. `"copy"` leaves a copy of the
    dragged text at the site at which the drag began. `"overlay"` does
    the drag in overlay mode, meaning the dragged text is laid on top of
    the existing text, obscuring and ultimately deleting it when the
    drag is complete.

  - `secondary_or_drag_start()`  
    To be attached to a mouse down event. Begins drag selecting a
    secondary selection, or dragging the contents of the primary
    selection, depending on whether the mouse is pressed inside of an
    existing primary selection.

  - `secondary_start()`  
    To be attached to a mouse down event. Begin drag selecting a
    secondary selection.

  - `select_all()`  
    Select the entire file.

  - `self_insert()`  
    To be attached to a key-press event, inserts the character
    equivalent of the key pressed.
