# Customizing NEdit-ng (28)

NEdit-ng can be customized in many different ways. The most important
user-settable options are presented in the Preferences menu, including
all options that users might need to change during an editing session.
Options set in the Default Settings sub-menu of the Preferences menu can
be preserved between sessions by selecting Save Defaults, which writes
the changes to the preferences file. See the section titled
"[Preferences](29)" for more details.

User defined commands can be added to NEdit-ng's Shell, Macro, and
window background menus. Dialogs for creating items in these menus can
be found under Customize Menus in the Default Settings sub menu of the
Preferences menu.

For users who depend on NEdit-ng every day and want to tune every
excruciating detail, there are also configuration settings for tuning a
vast number of such details, down to the color of each individual
button. See the section "[Config Entries](30)" for more information, as
well as a list of selected settings.

The most common reason for customizing your Config Entries for NEdit-ng,
however, is key binding. While limited key binding can be done through
Preferences settings (Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr;
Customize Menus), you can really only add keys this way, and each key
must have a corresponding menu item. Any significant changes to key
binding should be made via the Translations resource and menu
accelerator resources. The sections titled "[Key Binding](31)" and
"[Config Entries](30)" have more information.
