
The Preferences menu allows you to set options for both the current
editing window, and default values for newly created windows and future
NEdit-ng sessions. Options in the Preferences menu itself (not in the
Default Settings sub-menu) take effect immediately and refer to the
current window only. Options in the Default Settings sub-menu provide
initial settings for future windows created using the New or Open
commands; options affecting all windows are also set here.

Preferences set in the Default Settings sub-menu are saved in a file
that NEdit-ng reads at startup time (see "[The NEdit-ng Autoload
Files](#the-nedit-ng-autoload-files)" below), by selecting Save Defaults.

## Preferences Menu

  - Default Settings  
    Menu of initial settings for future windows. Generally the same as
    the options in the main part of the menu, but apply as defaults for
    future windows created during this NEdit-ng session. These settings
    can be saved using the Save Defaults command below, to be loaded
    automatically each time NEdit-ng is started.

  - Save Defaults  
    Save the default options as set under Default Settings for future
    NEdit-ng sessions

  - Statistics Line  
    Show the full file name, line number, and length of the file being
    edited

  - Incremental Search Line  
    Keep the incremental search bar (Search &rarr; Find Incremental)
    permanently displayed at the top of the window

  - Show Line Numbers  
    Display line numbers to the right of the text

  - Language Mode  
    Tells NEdit-ng what language (if any) to assume, for selecting
    language-specific features such as highlight patterns and smart
    indent macros, and setting language specific preferences like word
    delimiters, tab emulation, and auto-indent. See [Programming with
    NEdit-ng](10.md) for more information

  - Auto Indent  
    Setting Auto Indent "on" maintains a running indent (pressing the
    Return key will line up the cursor with the indent level of the
    previous line). If smart indent macros are available for the current
    language mode, smart indent can be selected and NEdit-ng will
    attempt to guess proper language indentation for each new line,
    details at [Auto/Smart Indent](12.md)

  - Wrap  
    Choose between two styles of automatic wrapping or none. Auto
    Newline wrap, wraps text at word boundaries when the cursor reaches
    the right margin, by replacing the space or tab at the last word
    boundary with a newline character. Continuous Wrap wraps long lines
    which extend past the right margin. Continuous Wrap mode is
    typically used to produce files where newlines are omitted within
    paragraphs, to make text filling automatic (a kind of poor-man's
    word processor). Text of this style is common on Macs and PCs but is
    not necessarily supported very well under Unix (except in programs
    which deal with e-mail, for which it is often the format of choice)

  - Wrap Margin  
    Set margin for Auto Newline Wrap, Continuous Wrap, and Fill
    Paragraph. Lines may, be wrapped at the right margin of the window,
    or the margin can be set at a specific column

  - Tab Stops  
    Set the tab distance (number of characters between tab stops) for
    tab characters, and control tab emulation and use of tab characters
    in padding and emulated tabs

  - Text Font...  
    Change the font(s) used to display text. See below for more
    information

  - Highlight Syntax  
    If NEdit-ng recognizes the language being edited, and highlighting
    patterns are available for that language, use fonts and colors to
    enhance viewing of the file. (See [Syntax Highlighting](13.md) for
    more information.)

  - Make Backup Copy  
    On Save, write a backup copy of the file as it existed before the
    Save command with the extension .bck

  - Incremental Backup  
    Periodically make a backup copy of the file being edited under the
    name `~filename` (see [Crash Recovery](36.md))

  - Show Matching (..)  
    Momentarily highlight matching parenthesis, brackets, and braces, or
    the range between them, when one of these characters is typed, or
    when the insertion cursor is positioned after it. Delimiter only
    highlights the matching delimiter, while Range highlights the whole
    range of text between the matching delimiters
    
    Optionally, the matching can make use of syntax information if
    syntax highlighting is enabled. Alternatively, the matching is
    purely character based. In general, syntax based matching results in
    fewer false matches

  - Overtype  
    In overtype mode, new characters entered replace the characters in
    front of the insertion cursor, rather than being inserted before
    them

  - Read Only  
    Lock the file against accidental modification. This temporarily
    prevents the file from being modified in this NEdit-ng session. Note
    that this is different from setting the file protection

## Preferences &rarr; Default Settings Menu

Options in the Preferences &rarr; Default Settings menu have the same
meaning as those in the top-level Preferences menu, except that they
apply to future NEdit-ng windows and future NEdit-ng sessions if saved
with the Save Defaults command. Additional options which appear in this
menu are:

  - Language Modes  
    Define language recognition information (for determining language
    mode from file name or content) and set language specific
    preferences.

  - Tag Collisions  
    How to react to multiple tags for the same name. Tags are described
    in the section: [Finding Declarations (ctags)](14.md). In Show All
    mode, all matching tags are displayed in a dialog. In Smart mode, if
    one of the matching tags is in the current window, that tag is
    chosen, without displaying the dialog.

  - Command Shell...  
    Set the shell used to run programs from the `shell_command()` macro
    function and from the Shell menu. This defaults to the user's login
    shell.

  - Colors...  
    Change the colors used to display text. The "Matching (..)" fields
    change the colors that matching parens, brackets and braces are
    flashed when the "Show Matching (..)" option is enabled. Note that
    the foreground colors for plain text, selected text, and matching
    paren flashing only apply when syntax highlighting is disabled. When
    syntax highlighting is enabled, text (even text that appears plain)
    will always be colored according to its highlighting style. (For
    information on changing syntax highlighting styles and matching
    patterns use see [Syntax Highlighting](13.md).)

  - Customize Menus  
    Add/remove items from the Shell, Macro, and window background menus
    (see below).

  - Customize Window Title  
    Opens a dialog where the information to be displayed in the window's
    title field can be defined and tested. The dialog contains a Help
    button, providing further information about the options available.

  - Searching  
    Options for controlling the behavior of Find and Replace commands:
    
      - *Verbose*  
        Presents search results in dialog form, asks before wrapping a
        search back around the beginning (or end) of the file (unless
        Beep On Search Wrap is turned on).

      - *Wrap Around*  
        Search and Replace operations wrap around the beginning (or end)
        of the file.

      - *Beep On Search Wrap*  
        Beep when Search and Replace operations wrap around the
        beginning (or end) of the file (only if Wrap Around is turned
        on).

      - *Keep Dialogs Up*  
        Don't pop down Replace and Find boxes after searching.

      - *Default Search Style*  
        Initial setting for search type in Find and Replace dialogs.

    Initial setting for the scope in the Replace/Find dialog, when a
    selection exists. It can be either "In Window", "In Selection", or
    "Smart". "Smart" results in "In Window" if the size of the selection
    is smaller than 1 line, and to "In Selection" otherwise.

  - Syntax Highlighting  
    Program and configure enhanced text display for new or supported
    languages. (See [Syntax Highlighting](13.md).)

  - Tabbed Editing  
    Options for controlling the tabbed interface:
    
      - *Open File in New Tab*  
        Open files in new tabs, else open files in new windows.

      - *Show Tab Bar*  
        Show/Hide the tab bar.

      - *Hide Tab Bar when only one Document is open*

      - *Next/Prev Tabs Across Windows*  
        Suppose there are two windows with three tabs in the first
        window and two tabs in the second window. Enabling this option,
        if you are on the third tab in the first window, hitting Ctrl +
        PageDown would switch to the first tab in the second window
        (instead of switching to the first tab in the first window).

      - *Sort Tabs Alphabetically*

  - Show Tooltips  
    Show file name and path in a tooltip when moving the mouse pointer
    over a tab. (See [Tabbed Editing](08.md).)

  - Terminate with Line Break on Save  
    Some programs expect text files to end with a newline. If this
    option is activated, NEdit-ng will append one if not already
    present.

  - Sort Open Prev.  
    Menu Option to order the File &rarr; Open Previous menu
    alphabetically, versus in order of last access.

  - Popups Under Pointer  
    Display pop-up dialogs centered on the current mouse position, as
    opposed to centered on the parent window. This generally speeds
    interaction, and is essential for users who set their window
    managers so keyboard focus follows the mouse.

  - Auto-Scroll Near Window Top/Bottom  
    When this option is enabled the window will automatically scroll
    when the cursor comes 4 lines from the top or bottom of the window
    (except at the beginning of the file). The number of lines can be
    customized with the `nedit.autoScrollVPadding` setting in the
    config.ini file.

  - Warnings  
    Options for controlling the popping up of warning dialogs:
    
      - *File Modified Externally*  
        Pop up a warning dialog when files get changed external to
        NEdit-ng.

      - *Check Modified File Contents*  
        If external file modification warnings are requested, also check
        the file contents iso. only the modification date.

      - *On Exit*  
        Ask before exiting when two or more files are open in an
        NEdit-ng session or before closing a window with two or more
        tabs.

  - Initial Window Size  
    Default size for new windows.

## Changing The Display Font

The font used to display text in NEdit-ng is set under Preferences
&rarr; Text Font (for the current window), or Preferences &rarr; Default
Settings Text Font (for future windows). NEdit-ng shows a list of the
monospaced fonts that are available on your system in this dialog.

## Customizing Menus

You can add or change items in the Shell, Macro, and window background
menus under Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Customize Menus.
When you choose one of these, you will see a dialog with a list of the
current user-configurable items from the menu on the left. To change an
existing item, select it from the list, and its properties will appear
in the remaining fields of the dialog, where you may change them.
Selecting the item "New" from the list allows you to enter new items in
the menu.

Hopefully most of the characteristics are self explanatory, but here are
a few things to note:

Accelerator keys are keyboard shortcuts which appear on the right hand
side of the menus, and allow you avoid pulling down the menu and
activate the command with a single keystroke. Enter accelerators by
typing the keys exactly as you would to activate the command.

Mnemonics are a single letter which should be part of the menu item
name, which allow users to traverse and activate menu items by typing
keys when the menu is pulled down.

In the Shell Command field of the Shell Commands dialog, the `%`
character expands to the name (including directory path) of the file in
the window. To include a `%` character in the command, use `%%`.

The Menu Entry field can contain special characters for constructing
hierarchical sub-menus, and for making items which appear only in
certain language modes. The right angle bracket character `>` creates a
sub-menu. The name of the item itself should be the last element of the
path formed from successive sub-menu names joined with `>`. Menu panes
are called in to existence simply by naming them as part of a Menu Entry
name. To put several items in the same sub-menu, repeat the same
hierarchical sequence for each. For example, in the Macro Commands
dialog, two items with menu entries: `a>b>c` and `a>b>d` would create a
single sub menu under the macro menu called `a`, which would contain a
single sub-menu, `b`, holding the actual items, `c` and `d`:

``` 
      +---++---++---+
      |a >||b >||c  |
      +---++---+|d  |
                +---+
```

To qualify a menu entry with a language mode, simply add an at-sign `@`
at the end of the menu command, followed (no space) by a language mode
name. To make a menu item which appears in several language modes,
append additional `@`s and language mode names. For example, an item
with the menu entry:

    Make C Prototypes@C@C++

would appear only in C and C++ language modes, and:

    Make Class Template@C++

would appear only in C++ mode.

Menu items with no qualification appear in all language modes.

If a menu item is followed by the single language qualification `@*`,
that item will appear only if there are no applicable language-specific
items of the same name in the same submenu. For example, if you have the
following three entries in the same menu:

    Make Prototypes@C@C++
    Make Prototypes@Java
    Make Prototypes@*

The first will be available when the language mode is C or C++, the
second when the language mode is Java, and for all other language modes
(including the "Plain" non-language mode). If the entry:

    Make Prototypes

also exists, this will always appear, meaning that the menu will always
have two "Make Prototypes" entries, whatever the language mode.

## The NEdit-ng Autoload Files

At startup time, NEdit-ng automatically reads its configuration file
`config.ini`, an optional Qt style sheet `style.qss`, a highlighting
theme file `theme.xml`, an optional autoload macro file `autoload.nm`,
and the history database `history`. The configuration file contains
saved preferences (menu settings) in the format of a Windows ini file.
The Qt style sheet can be used to adjust the appearance of the NEdit-ng
application. The highlighting theme file holds the text drawing styles
defined using the Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Syntax
Highlighting &rarr; Text Drawing Styles dialog. The autoload macro file
may provide macro commands and definitions for NEdit-ng to execute at
startup (NEdit-ng doesn't create this file automatically). NEdit-ng
saves a list of recently opened files, which appear under the Open
Previous menu, in the history database.

These files are normally located in `$HOME/.config/nedit-ng` but may be
elsewhere if the Qt Generic Config Location is different.

## Sharing Customizations with Other NEdit-ng Users

If you have written macro or shell menu commands, highlight patterns, or
smart-indent macros that you want to share with other NEdit-ng users,
you can make a file which they can load into their NEdit-ng environment.

To load such a file, start NEdit-ng with the command:

    nedit-ng -import <file>

In the new NEdit-ng session, verify that the imported patterns or macros
do what you want, then select Preferences &rarr; Save Defaults. Saving
incorporates the changes into the NEdit-ng preferences file, so the next
time you run NEdit-ng, you will not have to import the distribution
file.

Loading a customization file is automated, but creating one is not. To
produce a file to be imported by other users, you must make a copy of
your own preferences file, and edit it, by hand, to remove everything
but the few items of interest to the recipient. Leave only the
individual resource(s), and within those resources, only the particular
macro, pattern, style, etc, that you wish to exchange.

For example, to share a highlighting pattern set, you would include the
patterns, any new styles you added, and language mode information only
if the patterns are intended to support a new language rather than
updating an existing one. For example:

    nedit.highlightPatterns:\
        My Language:1:0{\n\
            Comment:"#":"$"::Comment::\n\
            Loop Header:"^[ \\t]*loop:":::Loop::\n\
        }
    nedit.languageModes: My Language:.my::::::
    nedit.styles: Loop:blue:Bold

Resources are in the format of X resource files, but the format of text
within multiple-item resources like highlight patterns, language modes,
macros, styles, etc., are private to NEdit-ng. Each resource is a string
which ends at the first newline character not escaped with `\`, so you
must be careful about how you treat ends of lines. While you can
generally just cut and paste indented sections, if something which was
originally in the middle of a resource string is now at the end, you
must remove the `\` line continuation character(s) so it will not join
the next line into the resource. Conversely, if something which was
originally at the end of a resource is now in the middle, you'll have to
add continuation character(s) to make sure that the resource string is
properly continued from beginning to end, and possibly newline
character(s) (`\n`) to make sure that it is properly separated from the
next item.
