
NEdit-ng has additional options to those provided in the Preferences
menu which are set in the config.ini file. Key binding (see "[Key
Binding](31.md)" is one of the most useful of these resource settable
options.

## Selected Configuration Item Names

The following are selected NEdit-ng configuration item names and default
values for NEdit-ng options not settable via the Preferences menu (for
preference resource names, see your NEdit-ng `config.ini` file):

  - `nedit.tagFile`: *(not defined)*  
    This can be the name of a file, or multiple files separated by a
    colon `:` character, of the type produced by Exuberant Ctags or the
    Unix ctags command, which NEdit-ng will load at startup time (see
    [Finding Declarations (ctags)](14.md)). The tag file provides a
    database from which NEdit-ng can automatically open files containing
    the definition of a particular subroutine or data type.

  - `nedit.alwaysCheckRelativeTagsSpecs`: `True`  
    When this resource is set to True, and there are tag files specified
    (with the `nedit.tagFile` setting, see above) as relative paths,
    NEdit-ng will evaluate these tag value paths whenever a file is
    opened. All accessible tag files will be loaded at this time. When
    this resource value is False, relative path tag specifications will
    only be evaluated at NEdit-ng startup time.

  - `nedit.wordDelimiters`: `.,/\`'!@#%^&*()-=+{}[]":;<>?`  
    The set of characters which mark the boundaries between words. In
    addition to these, spaces, tabs, and newlines are always word
    boundaries.
    
    These boundaries take effect for the move-by-word (Ctrl + Arrow) and
    select-word (double click) commands, and for doing regex searches
    using the `\B`, `<` and `>` tokens.
    
    Note that this default value may be overridden by the setting in
    Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Language Modes....

  - `nedit.typingHidesPointer`: `False`  
    Setting this resource to True causes the mouse pointer to be hidden
    when you type in the text area. As soon as the mouse pointer is
    moved, it will reappear. This is useful to stop the mouse pointer
    from obscuring text.

  - `nedit.maxPrevOpenFiles`: `30`  
    Number of files listed in the Open Previous sub-menu of the File
    menu. Setting this to zero disables the Open Previous menu item and
    maintenance of the NEdit-ng file history file.

  - `nedit.findReplaceUsesSelection`: `False`  
    Controls if the Find and Replace dialogs are automatically loaded
    with the contents of the primary selection.

  - `nedit.stickyCaseSenseButton`: `True`  
    Controls if the "Case Sensitive" buttons in the Find and Replace
    dialogs and the incremental search bar maintain a separate state for
    literal and regular expression searches. Moreover, when set to True,
    by default literal searches are case insensitive and regular
    expression searches are case sensitive. When set to False, the "Case
    Sensitive" buttons are independent of the "Regular Expression"
    toggle.

  - `nedit.undoModifiesSelection`: `True`  
    By default, NEdit-ng selects any text inserted or changed through a
    undo/redo action. Set this resource to False if you don't want your
    selection to be touched.

  - `nedit.autoWrapPastedText`: `False`  
    When Auto Newline Wrap is turned on, apply automatic wrapping (which
    normally only applies to typed text) to pasted text as well.

  - `nedit.heavyCursor`: `False`  
    For monitors with poor resolution or users who have difficulty
    seeing the cursor, makes the cursor in the text editing area of the
    window heavier and darker.

  - `nedit.autoScrollVPadding`: `4`  
    Number of lines to keep the cursor away from the top or bottom line
    of the window when the "Auto-Scroll Near Window Top/Bottom" feature
    is enabled. Keyboard operations that would cause the cursor to get
    closer than this distance cause the window to scroll up or down
    instead, except at the beginning of the file. Mouse operations are
    not affected.

  - `nedit.backlightCharTypes`:
    `  0-8,10-31,127:red;9:#dedede;32,160-255:#f0f0f0;128-159:orange `  
    (see "[Programming with NEdit-ng](10.md)").
    
    A string specifying character classes as ranges of ASCII values
    followed by the color to be used as their background colors. The
    format is:
    
    `low[-high]{,low[-high]}:color{;low-high{,low[-high]}:color}`
    
    where low and high are ASCII values.
    
    For example:
    `32-255:#f0f0f0;1-31,127:red;128-159:orange;9-13:#e5e5e5`

  - `nedit.focusOnRaise`: `False`  
    This setting determines whether new text windows and text windows
    that are raised, should also request the input focus.
    Conventionally, it is the task of the window manager to decide on
    which window gets the input focus. Therefore, NEdit-ng's default
    behaviour is not to request the input focus explicitly.

  - `nedit.forceOSConversion`: `True`  
    By default, NEdit-ng converts texts in MS-DOS or Mac format to an
    internal format using simple newlines as line dividers. This is
    sometimes not wanted by the user and can be prevented by setting
    this resource to False.

    Note: Setting this to False would supress newlines in Mac files
    entirely, leaving the control character `<cr>` where every line feed
    would be. macOS uses Unix files and is not affected.
    
    Note: Setting this to False while the option 'Terminate with Line
    Break on Save' is active could lead to file corruption.

  - `nedit.truncSubstitution`: `Fail`  
    NEdit-ng has a fixed limit on substitution result string length.
    This resource modifies the behaviour if this limit is exceeded.
    Possible values are `Silent` (0, will silently fail the operation),
    `Fail` (1, will fail the operation and pop up a dialog informing the
    user; this is the default), `Warn` (2, pops up a dialog warning the
    user, offering to cancel the operation) and `Ignore` (3, will
    silently conclude the operation).

    **WARNING**: Setting this to `Ignore` can destroy data without
    warning\!

  - `nedit.honorSymlinks`: `True`  
    If set to True, NEdit-ng will open a requested file on disk even if it
    is a symlink pointing to a file already opened in another window. If
    set to false, NEdit-ng will try to detect these cases and just pop up
    the already opened document.
