
## Writing Syntax Highlighting Patterns

Patterns are the mechanism by which language syntax highlighting is
implemented in NEdit-ng (see [Syntax Highlighting](13.md)). To create
syntax highlighting patterns for a new language, or to modify existing
patterns, select **Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Syntax
Highlighting &rarr; Recognition Patterns**.

First, a word of caution. As with regular expression matching in
general, it is quite possible to write patterns which are so inefficient
that they essentially lock up the editor as they recursively re-examine
the entire contents of the file thousands of times. With the
multiplicity of patterns, the possibility of a lock-up is significantly
increased in syntax highlighting. When working on highlighting patterns,
be sure to save your work frequently.

NEdit-ng's syntax highlighting works in real-time (as you type), and is
completely programmable using standard regular expression notation.
Other syntax highlighting editors often require the recognition engine
to be programmed in a compiled language such as C or C++. To achieve
this, NEdit-ng requires pattern writers to state self-imposed
limitations on the amount of context that patterns may examine when
re-parsing after a change. While the [Pattern Context Requirements](#pattern-context-requirements)
heading is near the end of this section, it is not optional, and must be
understood before making any serious effort at pattern writing.

In its simplest form, a highlight pattern consists of a regular
expression to match, along with a style representing the font an color
for displaying any text which matches that expression. To bold the word,
"highlight" wherever it appears the text, the regular expression simply
would be `highlight`. The style (selected from the drop down under
the heading of **Highlight Style**) determines how the text will be drawn.
To bold the text, either select an existing style, such as `Keyword`,
which bolds text, or create a new style and select it under **Highlight Style**.

The full range of regular expression capabilities can be applied in such
a pattern, with the single caveat that the expression must conclusively
match or not match, within the pre-defined context distance (as
discussed below under [Pattern Context Requirements](#pattern-context-requirements)).

To match longer ranges of text, particularly any constructs which exceed
the requested context, you must use a pattern which highlights text
between a starting and ending regular expression match. To do so, select
**Highlight text between starting and ending REs** under **Matching**, and
enter both a starting and ending regular expression. For example, to
highlight everything between double quotes, you would enter a double
quote character in both the starting and ending regular expression
fields. Patterns with both a beginning and ending expression span all
characters between the two expressions, including newlines.

Again, the limitation for automatic parsing to operate properly is that
both expressions must match within the context distance stated for the
pattern set.

With the ability to span large distances, comes the responsibility to
recover when things go wrong. Remember that syntax highlighting is
called upon to parse incorrect or incomplete syntax as often as correct
syntax. To stop a pattern short of matching its end expression, you can
specify an error expression, which stops the pattern from gobbling up
more than it should. For example, if the text between double quotes
shouldn't contain newlines, the error expression might be `$`. As with
both starting and ending expressions, error expressions must also match
within the requested context distance.

### Coloring Sub-Expressions

It is also possible to color areas of text within a regular expression
match. A pattern of this type associates a style with sub-expressions
references of the parent pattern (as used in regular expression
substitution patterns, see [Regular Expressions](16.md)). 
Sub-expressions of both the starting and ending patterns
may be colored. For example, if the parent pattern has a starting
expression `\<`, and end expression `\>`, (for highlighting all of the
text contained within angle brackets), a sub-pattern using `&` in both
the starting and ending expression fields could color the brackets
differently from the intervening text.

In some cases, there can be interference between coloring sub-patterns
and hierarchical sub-patterns (discussed next). How this is resolved, is
explained below.

### Hierarchical Patterns

A hierarchical sub-pattern, is identical to a top level pattern, but is
invoked only between the starting and ending expression matches of its
parent pattern or, in case the parent pattern consists of a single
expression, inside the text area matching that expression. Like the
sub-expression coloring patterns discussed above, it is associated with
a parent pattern using the **Parent Pattern** field in the pattern
specification.

The matching behaviour for sub-patterns is slightly different, depending
on whether the parent pattern consists of a single expression or has
both a starting and an ending expression.

In case the parent pattern consists of a single expression, and the
syntax highlighting parser finds a match for that expression,
sub-patterns are matched between the start and the end of the parent
match. Sub-patterns cannot extend beyond the boundaries of the parent's
match nor can they affect those boundaries (the latter can happen for
starting/ending parent patterns, see below). Note that sub-patterns can
*peek* beyond the parent's matching boundaries by means of look-ahead or
look-behind expressions.

In case the parent pattern is a starting/ending style pattern, after the
start expression of the parent pattern matches, the syntax highlighting
parser searches for either the parent's end pattern or a matching
sub-pattern. When a sub-pattern matches, control is not returned to the
parent pattern until the entire sub-pattern has been parsed, regardless
of whether the parent's end pattern appears in the text matched by the
sub-pattern. In this way, matching of the parent's ending pattern can be
postponed, in contrast to the case where the parent pattern consists of
a single expression. Note that, in this case, parsing of sub-patterns
starts **after** the match of the parent pattern's starting expression,
also in contrast to the single-expression case.

The most common use for this capability is for coloring sub-structure of
language constructs (smaller patterns embedded in larger patterns).
Hierarchical patterns can also simplify parsing by having sub-patterns
"hide" special syntax from parent patterns, such as special escape
sequences or internal comments.

There is no depth limit in nesting hierarchical sub-patterns, but beyond
the third level of nesting, automatic re-parsing will sometimes have to
re-parse more than the requested context distance to guarantee a correct
parse (which can slow down the maximum rate at which the user can type
if large sections of text are matched only by deeply nested patterns).

While this is obviously not a complete hierarchical language parser it
is still useful in many text coloring situations. As a pattern writer,
your goal is not to completely cover the language syntax, but to
generate colorings that are useful to the programmer. Simpler patterns
are usually more efficient and also more robust when applied to
incorrect code.

Note that in case of a single-expression parent pattern, there is a
potential for conflicts between coloring-only sub-patterns and
hierarchical sub-patterns (which cannot happen for starting/ending type
of patterns, because sub-patterns are matched **between** the starting
and ending pattern (not included)). Due to the different nature of these
two kinds of sub-patterns, it is technically infeasible to follow the
standard matching precedence rules, where a sub-pattern has precedence
over the sub-patterns following it. Instead, coloring-only sub-patterns
are always colored last, ie., they may override the coloring for
overlapping sibling sub-patterns in the overlapping parts of the
matches.

### Deferred (Pass-2) Parsing

NEdit-ng does pattern matching for syntax highlighting in two passes.
The first pass is applied to the entire file when syntax highlighting is
first turned on, and to new ranges of text when they are initially read
or pasted in. The second pass is applied only as needed when text is
exposed (scrolled in to view).

If you have a particularly complex set of patterns, and parsing is
beginning to add a noticeable delay to opening files or operations which
change large regions of text, you can defer some of that parsing from
startup time, to when it is actually needed for viewing the text.
Deferred parsing can only be used with single expression patterns, or
begin/end patterns which match entirely within the requested context
distance. To defer the parsing of a pattern to when the text is exposed,
click on the Pass-2 pattern type button in the highlight patterns
dialog.

Sometimes a pattern can't be deferred, not because of context
requirements, but because it must run concurrently with pass-1
(non-deferred) patterns. If they didn't run concurrently, a pass-1
pattern might incorrectly match some of the characters which would
normally be hidden inside of a sequence matched by the deferred pattern.
For example, C has character constants enclosed in single quotes. These
typically do not cross line boundaries, meaning they can be parsed
entirely within the context distance of the C pattern set and should be
good candidates for deferred parsing. However, they can't be deferred
because they can contain sequences of characters which can trigger
pass-one patterns. Specifically, the sequence, `\"`, contains a double
quote character, which would be matched by the string pattern and
interpreted as introducing a string.

### Pattern Context Requirements

The context requirements of a pattern set state how much additional text
around any change must be examined to guarantee that the patterns will
match what they are intended to match. Context requirements are a
promise by NEdit-ng to the pattern writer, that the regular expressions
in his/her patterns will be matched against at least `<line context>`
lines and `<character context>` characters, around any modified text.
Combining line and character requirements guarantee that both will be
met.

Automatic re-parsing happens on *every keystroke*, so the amount of
context which must be examined is very critical to typing efficiency.
The more complicated your patterns, the more critical the context
becomes. To cover all of the keywords in a typical language, without
affecting the maximum rate at which users can enter text, you may be
limited to just a few lines and/or a few hundred characters of context.

The default context distance is 1 line, with no minimum character
requirement. There are several benefits to sticking with this default.
One is simply that it is easy to understand and to comply with. Regular
expression notation is designed around single line matching. To span
lines in a regular expression, you must explicitly mention the newline
character `\n`, and matches which are restricted to a single line are
virtually immune to lock-ups. Also, if you can code your patterns to
work within a single line of context, without an additional
character-range context requirement, the parser can take advantage the
fact that patterns don't cross line boundaries, and nearly double its
efficiency over a one-line and 1-character context requirement. (In a
single line context, you are allowed to match newlines, but only as the
first and/or last character.)
