
Smart indent macros can be written for any language, but are usually
more difficult to write than highlighting patterns. A good place to
start, of course, is to look at the existing macros for C and C++.

Smart indent macros for a language mode consist of standard NEdit-ng
macro language code attached to any or all of the following three
activation conditions:

1. When smart indent is first turned on for a text window containing code of the language.
2. When a newline is typed and smart indent is expected.
3. after any character is typed. 

To attach macro code to any of these code "hooks", enter it in the appropriate
section in the **Preferences &rarr; Default Settings &rarr; Auto Indent &rarr; Program Smart Indent** dialog.

Typically most of the code should go in the initialization section,
because that is the appropriate place for subroutine definitions, and
smart indent macros are complicated enough that you are not likely to
want to write them as one monolithic run of code. You may also put code
in the **Common/Shared Initialization** section (accessible through the
button in the upper left corner of the dialog). Unfortunately, since the
C/C++ macros also reside in the common/shared section, when you add code
there, you run some risk of missing out on future upgrades to these
macros, because your changes will override the built-in defaults.

The `newline()` macro is invoked after the user types a newline, but
before the newline is entered in the buffer. It takes a single argument
`$1` which is the position at which the newline will be inserted. It
must return the number of characters of indentation the line should
have, or `-1`. A return value of `-1` means to do a standard auto-indent.
You must supply a newline macro, but the code: `return -1`
(auto-indent), or `return 0` (no indent) is sufficient.

The `type-in()` macro takes two arguments, and does not return a value.
`$1` is the insert position, and `$2` is the character just typed. It
also is invoked before the character is inserted into the buffer. You
can do just about anything here, but keep in mind that this macro is
executed for every keystroke typed, so if you try to get too fancy, you
may degrade performance.
