
    nedit-ng [-read] [-create] [-line n | +n] [-server]
          [-do command] [-tags file] [-tabs n] [-wrap]
          [-nowrap] [-autowrap] [-autoindent] [-noautoindent]
          [-autosave] [-noautosave] [-rows n] [-columns n]
          [-font font] [-lm languagemode] [-geometry geometry]
          [-iconic] [-noiconic] [-svrname name] [-import file]
          [-tabbed] [-untabbed] [-group] [-V|-version]
          [-h|-help] [--] [file...]

  - `-read`  
    Open the file Read Only regardless of the actual file protection.

  - `-create`  
    Don't warn about file creation when a file doesn't exist.

  - `-line n` (or `+n`)  
    Go to line number `n` in the file following this switch.

  - `-server`  
    Designate this session as an NEdit-ng server, for processing
    commands from the `nc-ng` program. `nc-ng` can be used to interface
    NEdit-ng to code development environments, mailers, etc., or just as
    a quick way to open files from the shell command line without
    starting a new NEdit-ng session.

  - `-do command`  
    Execute an NEdit-ng macro or action on the file following the `-do`
    argument on the command line. `-do` is particularly useful from the
    `nc-ng` program, where `nc-ng -do` can remotely execute commands in an
    NEdit-ng `-server` session.

  - `-tags file`  
    Load a file of directions for finding definitions of program
    subroutines and data objects. The file must be of the format
    generated by Exuberant Ctags, or the standard Unix `ctags` command.

  - `-tabs n`  
    Set tab stops every n characters.

  - `-wrap`, `-nowrap`  
    Wrap long lines at the right edge of the window rather than
    continuing them past it. (Continuous Wrap mode)

  - `-autowrap`, `-noautowrap`  
    Wrap long lines when the cursor reaches the right edge of the window
    by inserting newlines at word boundaries. (Auto Newline Wrap mode)

  - `-autoindent`, `-noautoindent`  
    Maintain a running indent.

  - `-autosave`, `-noautosave`  
    Maintain a backup copy of the file being edited under the name
    `~filename`.

  - `-rows n`  
    Default height in characters for an editing window.

  - `-columns n`  
    Default width in characters for an editing window.

  - `-font font` (or `-fn font`)  
    Font for text being edited.

  - `-lm languagemode`  
    Initial language mode used for editing succeeding files.

  - `-geometry geometry` (or `-g geometry`)  
    The initial size and/or location of editor windows. The argument
    geometry has the form:
    
        [<width>x<height>][+|-][<xoffset>[+|-]<yoffset>]
    
    where `<width>` and `<height>` are the desired width and height of
    the window, and `<xoffset>` and `<yoffset>` are the distance from
    the edge of the screen to the window, `+` for top or left, `-` for
    bottom or right. `-geometry` can be specified for individual files
    on the command line.

  - `-iconic`, `-noiconic`  
    Initial window state for succeeding files.

  - `-tabbed`  
    Open all subsequent files in new tabs. Resets `-group` option.

  - `-untabbed`  
    Open all subsequent files in new windows. Resets `-group` option.
    Note that this only works on subsequent files in this command and
    does not put NEdit-ng in tab-less mode.

  - `-group`  
    Open all subsequent files as tabs in a new window.

  - `-svrname name`  
    When starting NEdit-ng in server mode, name the server, such that it
    responds to requests only when `nc-ng` is given a corresponding
    `-svrname` argument. By naming servers, you can run several
    simultaneously, and direct files and commands specifically to any
    one. Specifying a non-empty name automatically designates this
    session as an NEdit-ng server, as though `-server` were specified.

  - `-import file`  
    Loads an additional preferences file on top of the existing defaults
    saved in your preferences file. To incorporate macros, language
    modes, and highlight patterns and styles written by other users, run
    NEdit-ng with `-import <file>`, then re-save your preferences file
    with **Preferences &rarr; Save Defaults**.

  - `-version`  
    `-V`  
    Prints out the NEdit-ng version information.

  - `-help`  
    `-h`  
    Prints out the NEdit-ng command line help.

  - `--`  
    Treats all subsequent arguments as file names, even if they start
    with a dash. This is so NEdit-ng can access files that begin with
    the dash character.
