# Client/Server Mode (35)

NEdit-ng can be operated on its own, or as a two-part client/server
application. Client/server mode is useful for integrating NEdit-ng with
software development environments, mailers, and other programs; or just
as a quick way to open files from the shell command line without
starting a new NEdit-ng session.

To run NEdit-ng in server mode, type:

    nedit-ng -server

NEdit-ng can also be started in server mode via the NEdit-ng Client
program (`nc-ng`) when no servers are available.

The `nc-ng` program, which is distributed along with NEdit-ng, sends
commands to an NEdit-ng server to open files or execute editor actions.
It can also be used on files that are already opened.

Listing a file on the `nc-ng` command line means: Open it if it is not
already open and bring the window to the front.

`nc-ng` supports the following command line options:

    nc-ng [-read] [-create]
       [-line n | +n] [-do command] [-lm languagemode]
       [-svrname name] [-svrcmd command]
       [-ask] [-noask] [-timeout seconds]
       [-geometry geometry | -g geometry] [-icon | -iconic]
       [-tabbed] [-untabbed] [-group] [-wait]
       [-V | -version]
       [--] [file...]

  - `-read`  
    Open the file read-only regardless of its actual permissions. There
    is no effect if the file is already open.

  - `-create`  
    Don't warn about file creation when a file doesn't exist.

  - `-line n`, `+n`  
    Go to line number `n`. This will also affect files which are already
    open.

  - `-do command`  
    Execute an NEdit-ng macro or action on the file following the -do
    argument on the command line.
    
    If you use this command without a filename, `nc-ng` would randomly
    choose one window to focus and execute the macro in.

  - `-lm languagemode`  
    Initial language mode used.

  - `-svrname name`  
    Explicitly instructs `nc-ng` which server to connect to, an instance
    of nedit-ng(1) with a corresponding `-svrname` argument. By naming
    servers, you can run several simultaneously, and direct files and
    commands specifically to any one.

  - `-svrcmd command`  
    The command which nc-ng uses to start an NEdit-ng server. Defaults
    to `nedit-ng -server`.

  - `-ask`, `-noask`  
    Instructs `nc-ng` to automatically start a server if one is not
    available.

  - `-timeout seconds`  
    Basic time-out period used in communication with an NEdit-ng server.
    The default is 10 seconds.
    
    Under rare conditions (such as a slow connection), it may be
    necessary to increase the time-out period. In most cases, the
    default is fine.

  - `-geometry geometry`, `-g geometry`  
    The initial size and/or location of editor windows. See [NEdit-ng
    Command Line](34) for details.

  - `-icon`, `-iconic`  
    Initial window state.

  - `-tabbed`  
    Open all subsequent files in new tabs. Resets `-group` option.

  - `-untabbed`  
    Open all subsequent files in new windows. Resets `-group` option.

  - `-group`  
    Open all subsequent files as tabs in a new window.

  - `-wait`  
    Instructs nc-ng not to return to the shell until all files given are
    closed.
    
    Normally, nc-ng returns once the files given in its command line are
    opened by the server. When this option is given, nc-ng returns only
    after the last file given in this call is closed.
    
    Note that this option affects all files in the command line, not
    only the ones following this option.
    
    Note that `nc-ng` will wait for all files given in the command line,
    even if the files were already opened.

  - `-version`, `-V`  
    Prints `nc-ng`'s version and build information.

### Command Line Arguments

In typical Unix style, arguments affect the files which follow them on
the command line, for example:

    incorrect:   `nc-ng file.c -line 25`
    correct:     `nc-ng -line 25 file.c`

`-read`, `-create`, and `-line` affect all of the files which follow
them on the command line.

The `-do` macro is executed only once, on the next file on the line.
`-do` without a file following it on the command line, executes the
macro on the first available window (presumably when you give a `-do`
command without a corresponding file or window, you intend it to do
something independent of the window in which it happens to execute).

The `-wait` option affects all files named in the command line.

### Multiple Servers

Sometimes it is useful to have more than one NEdit-ng server running,
for example to keep mail and programming work separate. The option,
`-svrname`, to both `nedit-ng` and `nc-ng`, allows you to start, and
communicate with, separate named servers. A named server responds only
to requests with the corresponding `-svrname` argument.

### Communication

Communication between `nc-ng` and `nedit-ng` is done through a local socket. `nc-ng` uses the DISPLAY environment variable, the machine
name and your user name to find the appropriate server.

The command which `nc-ng` uses to start an NEdit-ng server is settable
using the `-svrCommand` argument, by default `nedit-ng -server`.
