
Active developers: Tony Balinski, Arne Førlie, Nathaniel Gray, Eddy De
Greef, Thorsten Haude, Andrew Hood, Scott Tringali, and TK Soh.

Retired developers: Mark Edel, Joy Kyriakopulos, Christopher Conrad, Jim
Clark, Arnulfo Zepeda-Navratil, Suresh Ravoor, Max Vohlken, Yunliang Yu,
Donna Reid, Steve Haehn, Steve LoBasso, and Alexander Mai.

The regular expression matching routines used in NEdit are adapted (with
permission) from original code written by Henry Spencer at the
University of Toronto.

The Microline widgets are inherited from the Mozilla project.

Syntax highlighting patterns and smart indent macros were contributed
by: Simon T. MacDonald, Maurice Leysens, Matt Majka, Alfred Smeenk,
Alain Fargues, Christopher Conrad, Scott Markinson, Konrad Bernloehr,
Ivan Herman, Patrice Venant, Christian Denat, Philippe Couton, Max
Vohlken, Markus Schwarzenberg, Himanshu Gohel, Steven C. Kapp, Michael
Turomsha, John Fieber, Chris Ross, Nathaniel Gray, Joachim Lous, Mike
Duigou, Seak Teng-Fong, Joor Loohuis, Mark Jones, and Niek van den Berg.

NEdit sources, executables, additional documentation, and contributed
software are available from the NEdit web site at http://www.nedit.org.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the [GNU General Public License](38.md) as
published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

In addition, as a special exception to the GNU GPL, the copyright
holders give permission to link the code of this program with the Motif
and Open Motif libraries (or with modified versions of these that use
the same license), and distribute linked combinations including the two.
You must obey the GNU General Public License in all respects for all of
the code used other than linking with Motif/Open Motif. If you modify
this file, you may extend this exception to your version of the file,
but you are not obligated to do so. If you do not wish to do so, delete
this exception statement from your version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the section on
the [GNU General Public License](38.md) for more details.
