
## Solutions to Common Problems

For a much more comprehensive list of common problems and solutions, see
the NEdit FAQ. The latest version of the FAQ can always be found on the
NEdit web site at:

<http://www.nedit.org>.

-----

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: No files are shown in the "Files" list in the Open... dialog.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: When you use the "Filter" field, include the file specification or a
complete directory specification, including the trailing "/" on Unix.
(See Help in the Open... dialog).

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: Find Again and Replace Again don't continue in the same direction as
the original Find or Replace.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: Find Again and Replace Again don't use the direction of the original
search. The Shift key controls the direction: Ctrl+G means forward,
Shift+Ctrl+G means backward.

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: Preferences specified in the Preferences menu don't seem to get saved
when I select Save Defaults.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: NEdit has two kinds of preferences: 1) per-window preferences, in the
Preferences menu, and 2) default settings for preferences in newly
created windows, in the Default Settings sub-menu of the Preferences
menu. Per-window preferences are not saved by Save Defaults, only
Default Settings.

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: Columns and indentation don't line up.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: NEdit is using a proportional width font. Set the font to a fixed
style (see Preferences menu).

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: NEdit performs poorly on very large files.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: Turn off Incremental Backup. With Incremental Backup on, NEdit
periodically writes a full copy of the file to disk.

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: Commands added to the Shell Commands menu (Unix only) don't output
anything until they are finished executing.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: If the command output is directed to a dialog, or the input is from a
selection, output is collected together and held until the command
completes. De-select both of the options and the output will be shown
incrementally as the command executes.

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: Dialogs don't automatically get keyboard focus when they pop up.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: Most X Window managers allow you to choose between two categories of
keyboard focus models: pointer focus, and explicit focus. Pointer focus
means that as you move the mouse around the screen, the window under the
mouse automatically gets the keyboard focus. NEdit users who use this
focus model should set "Popups Under Pointer" in the Default Settings
sub menu of the preferences menu in NEdit. Users with the explicit focus
model, in some cases, may have problems with certain dialogs, such as
Find and Replace. In MWM this is caused by the mwm resource
startupKeyFocus being set to False (generally a bad choice for explicit
focus users). NCDwm users should use the focus model "click" instead of
"explicit", again, unless you have set it that way to correct specific
problems, this is the appropriate setting for most explicit focus users.

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: The Backspace key doesn't work, or deletes forward rather than
backward.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: While this is an X/Motif binding problem, and should be solved
outside of NEdit in the Motif virtual binding layer (or possibly xmodmap
or translations), NEdit provides an out. If you set the resource:
nedit.remapDeleteKey to True, NEdit will forcibly map the delete key to
backspace. The default setting of this resource recently changed, so
users who have been depending on this remapping will now have to set it
explicitly (or fix their bindings).

</div>

</div>

<div class="panel panel-default">

<div class="panel-heading">

P: NEdit crashes when I try to paste text in to a text field in a dialog
(like Find or Replace) on my SunOS system.

</div>

<div class="panel-body">

S: On many SunOS systems, you have to set up an nls directory before
various inter-client communication features of Motif will function
properly. There are instructions in README.sun in
/pub/v5\_0\_2/individual/README.sun on ftp.nedit.org, as well as a tar
file containing a complete nls directory:
ftp://ftp.nedit.org/pub/v5\_0\_2/nls.tar. README.sun contains directions
for setting up an nls directory, which is required by Motif for handling
copy and paste to Motif text fields.

</div>

</div>

## Known Defects

Below is the list of known defects which affect NEdit. The defects your
copy of NEdit will exhibit depend on which system you are running and
with which Motif libraries it was built. Note that there are now Motif
1.2 and/or 2.0 libraries available on ALL supported platforms, and as
you can see below there are far fewer defects in Motif 1.2, so it is in
your best interest to upgrade your system.

### All Versions

**DEFECT**

Operations between rectangular selections on overlapping lines do
nothing.

***Work Around***

None. These operations are very complicated and rarely used.

**DEFECT**

Cut and Paste menu items fail, or possibly crash, for very large
(multi-megabyte) selections.

***Work Around***

Use selection copy (middle mouse button click) for transferring larger
quantities of data. Cut and Paste save the copied text in server memory,
which is usually limited.

## Reporting Defects

Submit bugs through the web at:

<https://github.com/eteran/nedit-ng/issues>
