
The Tabs dialog controls both the operation of the Tab key, and the
interpretation of tab characters within a file.

The first field, Tab Spacing, controls how NEdit-ng responds to tab
characters in a file. On most Unix and VMS systems the conventional
interpretation of a tab character is to advance the text position to the
nearest multiple of eight characters (a tab spacing of 8). However, many
programmers of C and other structured languages, when given the choice,
prefer a tab spacing of 3 or 4 characters. Setting a three or four
character hardware tab spacing is useful and convenient as long as your
other software tools support it. Unfortunately, on Unix and VMS systems,
system utilities, such as more, and printing software can't always
properly display files with other than eight character tabs.

Selecting "Emulate Tabs" will cause the Tab key to insert the correct
number of spaces or tabs to reach the next tab stop, as if the tab
spacing were set at the value in the "Emulated tab spacing" field.
Backspacing immediately after entering an emulated tab will delete it as
a unit, but as soon as you move the cursor away from the spot, NEdit-ng
will forget that the collection of spaces and tabs is a tab, and will
treat it as separate characters. To enter a real tab character with
"Emulate Tabs" turned on, use <kbd>Ctrl+Tab</kbd>.

In generating emulated tabs, and in Shift Left, Paste Column, and some
rectangular selection operations, NEdit-ng inserts blank characters
(spaces or tabs) to preserve the alignment of non-blank characters. The
bottom toggle button in the Tabs dialog instructs NEdit-ng whether to
insert tab characters as padding in such situations. Turning this off,
will keep NEdit-ng from automatically inserting tabs. Some software
developers prefer to keep their source code free of tabs to avoid its
misinterpretation on systems with different tab character conventions.
