# Customize Window Title Dialog (42)

The Customize Window Title dialog allows you to customize and test the
way information will be displayed in each window's title field.

### Definition of the title

The upper half of the dialog can be used to select the various
components that should be displayed in the title. The layout can be
fine-tuned by editing the `printf()` like format string below the
component buttons: additional characters can be entered, or the order
can be changed.

The following sequences are interpreted in the format string:

  - `%c`  
    ClearCase view tag (only relevant when NEdit-ng is used together
    with ClearCase)

  - `%[n]d`  
    directory, with one optional numeric digit `n` specifying the
    maximum number of trailing directory components to display. Skipped
    components are replaced by an ellipsis (`...`).

  - `%f`  
    file name, without the path name.

  - `%h`  
    host name.

  - `%s`  
    NEdit-ng server name (server mode only).

  - `%[*]S`  
    file status, either verbose (`%S`) or brief (`%*S`). In verbose mode
    the file status is spelled out: `read-only`, `locked` or `modified`.
    In brief mode, abbreviations and an asterisk are used for the
    respective states: `RO`, `LO`, `*`.

  - `%u`  
    user name

The format string and the component buttons are continously
synchronized.

The default format is:

    {{ '{%c}' }} [%s] %f (%S) - %d

The resulting title will only contain elements with a value. Hence, the
title is compressed as follows:

  - elements with no value are removed.
  - Empty parenthesis pairs i.e. `()`, `[]` or `{}`, or parenthesis
    pairs containing only space(s), are removed.
  - Sequences of spaces are replaced with one space.
  - Leading spaces and dashes are removed.
  - Trailing spaces and dashes are removed.

If the server name and the ClearCase view tag are identical, only the
first one specified in the format string will be displayed.

### Previewing the settings

The lower part of the dialog can be used to test the selected title
under various conditions. For some of the components that are selected
for display, various states can be enforced on the preview.

For instance, components that are not always active (such the NEdit-ng
server name) can be turned on or off in the preview.
